CHESS
by Wikibooks contributors
From Wikibooks,
the open-content textbooks collection
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free
Documentation License, Version 1.2 or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts. A copy of the license is
included in the section entitled "GNU Free Documentation License".
Image licenses are listed in the section entitled "Image Credits."
Principal authors: WarrenWilkinson (C) · Dysprosia (C) · Darvian (C) · Tm chk (C) · Bill Alexander (C)
Cover: Chess pieces – left to right: king, rook, queen, pawn, knight and bishop.
Photo taken by Alan Light.
The current version of this Wikibook may be found at:
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Chess
Contents
Chapter 01: Playing the Game..............................................................................................................4
Chapter 02: Notating the Game..........................................................................................................14
Chapter 03: Tactics.............................................................................................................................19
Chapter 04: Strategy........................................................................................................................... 26
Chapter 05: Basic Openings............................................................................................................... 36
Chapter 06: The Endgame.................................................................................................................. 61
About the book................................................................................................................................... 76
History & Document Notes........................................................................................................... 76
Authors & Image Credits...............................................................................................................77
GNU Free Documentation License................................................................................................78
Chapter 1
1 PLAYING THE GAME
live version • discussion • edit lesson • comment • report an error • ask a question
Overview
Chess, unlike many other games, does not involve chance. It does not hinge on the roll of dice
or which card is drawn. The outcome completely depends on the decisions of both the players.
However, because of its vast complexity, the far-reaching consequences of some decisions are
practically unforeseeable.
One player ("White") has the white pieces while the other ("Black") has the black pieces. In
friendly games the choice of colors can be made by any method, such as flipping a coin - if there is
no coin at hand, another typical way of deciding would be to conceal a black piece in one hand and
a white piece in the other and ask one's opponent to select a hand, the colored piece selected will be
the opponent's color. In competitive games the players are assigned their colors.
Order of play
Once all the pieces have been arranged, White makes the first move. White always makes the
first move; this is important for notation, and any chess player will insist upon it. After White has
made their move, Black will then make a move. The gameplay will continue in alternating fashion,
White making a move, followed by Black.
General movement rules
• A move consists of moving a single piece, in accordance with its rules of movement, to
a square that is unoccupied or occupied by an enemy piece.
• If a piece is moved onto a square occupied by an enemy piece, the latter piece is
removed from play and the first piece replaces it. The removed piece is said to have been
captured or taken.
• With the exception of the knight, no piece may make a move to a non-adjacent square
unless all the intervening squares are vacant (pieces may not 'jump over' other pieces).
• No player may make a move that leaves their king in check (see below).
There are some exceptions to these rules, where a player's turn can consist of two pieces
moving (castling), where a piece moves to an unoccupied square but still captures (en passant
capture), or where a piece moves to a square and becomes a different unit (promotion), all of which
are covered below.
4 | Chess
Playing The Game
The board
Traditionally, the game is played on a board of 64 alternating black and white squares turned
with a white square to each player's far right. "White on right" is a helpful saying to remember this
convention. The light and dark squares on the chessboard and the light and dark chess pieces are
traditionally referred to as "white" and "black" respectively, although in modern chess sets almost
any colors may be used. The horizontal rows of squares are called ranks and are numbered 1-8; the
vertical rows of squares are called files and given the letters a-h.
The pieces
The movement of the individual pieces is described below. In all the board diagrams shown,
the squares to which the piece in question can move are indicated with x's.
King
The king can move one square at a time in any direction, with certain restrictions.
The king is the most important piece belonging to each player, though not the most powerful. If
a player moves a piece such that it threatens to capture his opponent's king, that king is said to be in
check. If a player's king is in check, he must immediately remove the check by moving the king,
blocking the check with another piece, or capturing the checking piece. As mentioned above,
players may not place their own king in check; however, they may check their opponent's king. Two
kings may never occupy adjacent squares, since they would have put themselves in check by
moving there.
If the king is placed in check and cannot escape, it is said to have been checkmated (or "mated"
for short). The first player to checkmate the opponent's king wins the game. Note that the king is
never actually captured, since it is obliged to move out of check whenever possible (and the game
ends when it is impossible).
The White king in the following diagram cannot move upwards or to the left since it would be
in check from the bishop, or diagonally downwards which would leave it adjacent to the Black king.
Wikibooks | 5
Chapter 1
Capturing Pieces
The king may capture any opponent's piece adjacent to it, as long as doing so does not place
himself in check.
Knight
The knight has a unique L-shaped move; two squares in one direction either horizontally or
vertically, and one square in another direction perpendicular to the first. The knight is the only piece
that may jump over other pieces.
6 | Chess
Playing The Game
Capturing Pieces
The knight captures any opponent's piece that it lands on during its L-shaped move.
Bishop
The bishop can move any number of squares diagonally. Each side starts the game with one
light-squared bishop and one dark-squared bishop. Note that the bishop is restricted to the color of
squares on which it began. For example, the bishop in the following diagram stands on a light
square, and can only move to other light squares.
Capturing Pieces
The bishop may not jump over any piece of either color. It captures any opponent's piece that it
encounters during the movement described above, and then occupies the captured piece's square.
Rook
The rook can be moved any number of squares horizontally or vertically, but not diagonally.
Wikibooks | 7
Chapter 1
Queen
The queen is the most powerful piece, being able to move any number of squares in any lateral
or diagonal direction. It is best described as the combination of a rook's and bishop's movement
capabilities.
Pawn
8 | Chess
Playing The Game
Pawns can move one square straight forward, or optionally and on their first move only, two
squares straight forward. The pawn can move one square diagonally forward to capture a piece, but
cannot capture a piece by moving straight forward. For this reason, two opposing pawns on a file
may become blocked by each other. If a pawn makes it to one of the eight squares along the far
edge of the board from their initial position, the pawn is promoted. A promoted pawn is replaced, as
part of the same move which brought it to the promotion square, with a knight, bishop, rook or
queen of the same color which need not be a previously captured piece. Thus a player can acquire
two queens (or up to nine, if he so desires, since there are eight pawns to promote).
In the diagram below the White pawn is prevented from moving forwards by the Black pawn
immediately in front of it which it cannot capture, but it captures the other Black pawn by moving
diagonally forwards.
Special moves
Kingside castling: O-O
Wikibooks | 9
Chapter 1
Queenside castling: O-O-O
Castling
Castling is a move involving the king and either of the rooks. Castling performed with the
king's rook is kingside castling, performed with the queen's rook it is queenside castling.
Subject to restrictions detailed below, a player may move his king two squares towards the
rook, and subsequently, on the same turn, move the rook to the square over which the king has just
passed.
The king must be the first piece moved; not the rook. If the rook is moved first, then the king
must stay where it is. This mainly applies in "strict rules of chess" where if a piece is touched, it
must be moved.
The restrictions specific to castling are:
1. Neither the king nor the participating rook may have moved previously
2. The king must not be in check at the start of the move, though it may have been in
check previously in the game
3. The square over which the king passes must not be under attack ('in check') from an
enemy piece
4. The squares between the king and rook must be vacant
And as with any move, the king may not place itself in check.
En passant capture
This is French for "in passing"; basically, you capture an enemy pawn as it is passing you.
When a pawn advances two squares onto the same rank as an opposing pawn on an adjacent
file, this opposing pawn may, on that player's next move only, capture the advancing pawn as
though it had only moved one square (provided the move is otherwise legal). The pawn's ability to
move two squares on their first move was a relatively late addition to the game of chess. En Passant
was introduced to prevent abuses of the new rule.
10 | Chess
Playing The Game
In the following example, the Black pawn advances two squares, and is captured by the White
pawn which moves diagonally forwards and to the right (as if the Black pawn had been there). This
move is only allowed on the turn in which the option is presented.
Initial position
In the initial position each side has eight pawns, two rooks, two knights, two bishops, a queen
and a king arranged as shown in the diagram below. Note that the only pieces on either side which
can initially move are the pawns and knights.
Beginners usually set up the board incorrectly; it is a complex position to remember. The
following anectotes may help you remember where the pieces go.
• White on the Right It is important that the bottom-right-hand square is light-colored.
• Knights live in castles One knight is placed next to each rook (rooks look like the
Wikibooks | 11
Chapter 1
towers of a castle.)
• Queens on their color The White Queen goes on a White Square, Black Queen goes on
a Black Square
• Bishops are advisers to the Royalty Bishops surround the King and Queen.
• White King on the Right From the White Player's perspective, both Kings are on the
right, and from the Black Player's perspective, the Kings are on the left.
Conclusion of the game
Play continues to alternate between White and Black until one of the following outcomes is
reached:
• One player's king is checkmated. The game is lost by that player.
• In a competitive game, one player runs out of time. The game is lost by that player.
• One player resigns, which is equivalent to quitting the game. A player may resign on
either his or his opponent's turn. Resignation is often symbolized by the resigning player
knocking down his king.
• The player whose turn it is is in stalemate, meaning that he has no legal move and is not
in check. The game is a draw.
• The players agree to draw the game. Either player may offer a draw to his opponent
upon completion of his move. If the offer is accepted, the game is drawn. Draw offers
cannot be rescinded.
• A player successfully claims that the game is a draw under one of the following criteria:
• His opponent does not have sufficient pieces to checkmate him by any legal
sequence of moves.
• 50 moves have been played by each player since a piece was captured or a pawn
moved.
• The current position has occurred twice before with the same player to move.
Chess Etiquette
Generally, chess games at tournaments are conducted under the following rules:
• Touch move - If a player touches a piece he must move it. If he places a piece on a
square, he must move it to that square. If you need to center a piece on its square, it is
traditional to say j'adoube (I adjust).
• Be silent when your opponent is on the move - You can only adjust pieces, offer a
draw, or claim a draw when it is your turn to move.
A friendly game may be played any way that is mutually agreeable. Generally it is considerate
to avoid distracting your opponent.
12 | Chess
Playing The Game
Glossary
• Capture - To move one's piece into the same square as one of one's opponent's pieces.
• Check - The king is 'in check' when it is being attacked by an enemy piece.
• Checkmate - The player whose turn it is can make no legal move and the king is in
check.
• Stalemate - The player whose turn it is can make no legal move, but the king is not in
check.
Wikibooks | 13
Chapter 2
2 NOTATING THE GAME
live version • discussion • edit lesson • comment • report an error • ask a question
Writing the game down is of importance to the chess student, as it allows review of game
strategy of the student as well as others' play.
Algebraic notation
There are many older systems of writing down chess games, but the current standard, which
will be introduced here, is algebraic notation. Let's look at a sample game in progress to get a feel
for this system.
Say we have the following game (which has proceeded for a while)
Simple Game
Each square is uniquely identified in algebraic notation by a coordinate comprising a letter and
a number. These letters and numbers are displayed along the borders of the above diagram. For
example, the square in the bottom left corner of the board is a1, and the square in the top right h8.
The White king is on e1 and the Black king on f7.
It is White's turn to move. White decides to move the d3 bishop to c4 in order to check Black's
king. Let's suppose this is White's 30th move. So we can write
30. Bc4+
(Note that in some books you may see instead of the letter B a stylized icon of a bishop - the
notations however are equivalent) This means that on White's 30th move, a bishop has been moved
to the square c4. Because there is only one bishop that could move to c4, we don't need to write
14 | Chess
Notating The Game
where that bishop came from. The + signifies the check. A # signifies checkmate. In older works, a
++ signified checkmate.
Simple Game
White's bishop is now, unfortunately, in the Queen's line of fire. Black decides to capture it. So
for the Black's 30th move, we can write
30... Qxc4
This means that on Black's 30th move, a queen has been moved and captured (which the x
signifies) the piece at c4. When Black's move is written separately from White's, three dots are
placed between the number and the move thus: 30...Qxc4. Sometimes, the capture is designated
with a : instead, thus: Q:c4, or even rarer: Qc4:
(You may see in some chess books symbols such as ??, ?, ! or !!. These are like side comments
- question marks signify potentially poor moves, and exclamation marks signify good ones. !? may
signify an unclear move. Since White's move was rather poor, we could write 30. Bc4+? Qxc4 to
say that White's move was poor.)
Wikibooks | 15
Chapter 2
Now the board looks like this.
Simple Game
White is in trouble now, and decides to start to flee to f2. We can write
31. Kf2
for such a move. If Black's queen decides to check White's king at this point, by moving the
queen to c2, we write
31... Qc2+
Annotation shorthand
If a move is followed by a ! then this indicates that the move was surprisingly good at times. If
followed by a ? then this indicates that a move was questionable or of poor strategy. !! and ?? mean
the same, with greater emphasis. A !? marks an interesting move that may be sub-optimal, and a ?!
marks a dubious move that may not be possible to refute.
1-0 signifies a win for white, 0-1 a win for black, and 1/2 a draw. = indicates positional equality
between the players, +/– means that white is considered to have the advantage, and –/+ indicates an
advantage to black.
Sometimes moves can be ambiguous - that is, two pieces of the same designation can move to
one square. In that case, it is customary to specify which piece moved there by designating the file
alone if it identifies which piece is used. If the file is not enough to identify the piece, then the file
and rank are both written in. This can be done with parentheses or without.
16 | Chess
Notating The Game
Special moves
• Castling is designated by either 0-0 or 0-0-0, depending on whether castling occurred
kingside or queenside, respectively.
• En passant capture is designated by the suffix e.p. if there is ambiguity.
• Promotion of a pawn is denoted by the original move, with the designation of the piece
the pawn became at the end. Check or !/? designations are placed after the name of the new
piece.
Designations
The designations for each of the pieces are:
R for rook (castle)
N for knight
B for bishop
Q for queen
K for king
No capital letter for pawn.
Descriptive Notation
An older form of notation you will run into quite frequently is the descriptive notation. It is
useful to know because older books use it.
In this form, instead of the files being a, b, c etc., they are Queen rook (QR), Queen Knight
(QN), Queen Bishop (QB), Queen (Q), King (K), King Bishop (KB), King Knight (KN) and King
Rook (KR). The ranks are labeled from your point of view so that the square e4 (in algebraic) is
White's K4 and Black's K5.
To record the moving of a piece, you write the piece, and to where it moves. 1. P-K4 means
move a pawn to the 4th rank in the King's file. N-QB3 means move your Knight to the third rank in
the Queen's Bishop file. To take you specify the piece taking, and the piece to be taken. QRPxN
means pawn in the Queen Rook file takes Knight. Excessive notation is left out so that if only one
pawn could legally take a Knight the move is recorded as PxN.
In order to compare the two systems let's look at the same game in both algebraic and
descriptive notation
Algebraic
1. e4 e6
2. d4 d5
3. Nc3 Bb4
4. Bb5+ Bd7
5. Bxd7+ Qxd7
Wikibooks | 17
Chapter 2
6. N(g)e2 dxe4
7. 0-0
Descriptive
1. P-K4 P-K3
2. P-Q4 P-Q4
3. N-QB3 B-N5 (Note here that only one bishop can go to a QN5 so it is unnecessary to specify
the Queen Knight file rather than the King Knight file)
4. B-N5ch B-Q2 (check is given by ch)
5. BxBch QxB
6. KN-K2 PxP
7. 0-0
Coordinate Notation
A different type of notation uses only the squares that the pieces were on to denote movements.
For example, to denote the earlier 7 moves, the following notes are shown:
1. e2-e4 e7-e6
2. d2-d4 d7-d5
3. b1-c3 f8-b4
4. f1-b5+ c8-d7
5. b5xd7+ d8xd7
6. g1-e2 d5xe4
7. 0-0
ICCF numerical notation
This notation is international because it does not depend on piece names or specific alphabets.
A move is denoted by the file, then rank, of its starting square (from 11 at the White queen’s rook
square to 88 at the Black king’s rook square). 1. e4 is denoted 5254. Castling is denoted by
specifying the king’s two-square move, and pawn promotion with a fifth number specifying the new
piece (1=queen, 2=rook, 3=bishop, 4=knight).
18 | Chess
Tactics
3 TACTICS
live version • discussion • edit lesson • comment • report an error • ask a question
Guarding
When one of your pieces is placed so that it attacks a square occupied by another of your
pieces, the first piece is said to be guarding the other. When your opponent captures the guarded
piece, you can recapture with the guarding piece. Note that if you have a piece that is pinned to your
king by an opposing piece (see below for a description of pins), it cannot be said to be guarding
anything, since it is unable to move or capture.
Batteries
Batteries are formed when two or more pieces work together. The most common kind of
battery is the doubling of rooks on a file. Other batteries can be formed by rook-queen or bishopqueen.
A triple battery can be constructed with the queen and both rooks. It is often advantageous to
place the queen behind one or both rooks.
The Exchange
In pretty much any game, a player will have the opportunity to take one of his opponents pieces
in exchange for one of his own pieces. This should however NOT be done for its own sake! Initiate
an exchange only when it benefits you. Benefits can include, but are not limited to:
• Material advantage - queen for a minor piece, queen for rook, rook for a minor piece, a
piece for a pawn or two, etc.
• Doubling pawns - Take when taking back means the doubling (or tripling) of your
opponent's pawns on the same file.
• Opening up the king's defenses - Take when taking back means moving a pawn that
exposes the king.
• Removing a defender - Take when the piece being taken is providing an essential
service for the opponent.
• Blunting an attack - When you are being attacked, often a well timed exchange will
leave your opponent with too few pieces to keep up the attack.
• Gaining space - In a cramped position, having more pieces can actually be a
disadvantage because the pieces get in the way of each other. If your opponent has a space
advantage, exchanging pieces can lessen the advantage and make the resultant less
confining.
• Improving a material advantage - if you are ahead material, exchanging pieces will
usually benefit you (note - pieces, NOT pawns). Similarly, if you have an extra pawn, trade
Wikibooks | 19
Chapter 3
pieces that may otherwise be used as a sacrifice to prevent pawn promotion.
Forks
The Royal Fork
Sometimes a piece can be in position to attack two enemy pieces at once. This is called a fork.
All pieces can fork, even pawns, but knights have a reputation for making especially vicious forks
because they can jump over other pieces.
Forking with check
Forks on unthreatened squares which attack the king are the most powerful. The opponent must
then move his king to safety and the other piece in the fork has no chance of escape.
The Royal Fork
A royal fork is one involving both your opponent's king and queen. In the example shown here,
white's knight on f7 has engaged black in a Royal fork. Black will be down the exchange of a queen
for a knight.
20 | Chess
Tactics
Pinned pieces
The white knight pinned by the black
bishop
A pinned piece is a piece that cannot move because it would expose an attack on an important
piece by one of the opposing pieces, such that the capture of the important piece would result in
material gain by the opponent. A very useful device is to pin the opponent's pieces to his king; this
is known as an absolute pin. For example, imagine white's king on e1, a white knight on c3, and d2
empty. Black now moves his dark-squared bishop to b4. The white knight is now pinned and cannot
move. A pawn on e4 is no longer guarded by the knight, which could not capture a black piece
taking this pawn.
In contrast to the absolute pin, a relative pin occurs when one player's piece is pinned to one of
lesser value than the king, such as a queen or rook. If the benefit of moving the pinned piece
outweighs the loss of material occasioned by the capture of the exposed piece (for example, if a
forced mate may be achieved), then the pin can be disregarded and the pinned piece moved.
Wikibooks | 21
Chapter 3
Skewers
Skewer about to happen
A skewer is similar to a pin, but it is in a sense more powerful. Black has, in a blunderous
moment, placed his king on d7 in front of his queen on d8. White may now triumphantly slide his
rook (either one) to d1, skewering Black's king and queen. Since Black cannot block the check, the
king has to move, exposing the black queen to the attack of the white rook.
Discoveries
A discovery is an attack on an enemy piece which is unveiled by moving one of your pieces.
The power of discoveries is that two targets can be attacked simultaneously. If combined with a
check they can be lethal.
Removing the defender
By first capturing, threatening, or pinning a piece that guards another, you might be able to
capture the other piece for free.
22 | Chess
Tactics
Sacrifices
A sacrifice is an exchange of a piece for a non material advantage:
After 1. Kh1
After 1. ... Qg1
After 2. Rxg1
Wikibooks | 23
Chapter 3
After 2. ... Nf2#
In the first diagram, White just moved 1. Kh1 to get out of check.
Black sacrifices his queen with 1...Qg1 for a winning positional advantage - White is in check
and can not take with his king because the knight guards the queen.
2. Rxg1 - forced - this smothers the king - he cannot move because his own pieces are on every
square he could go to - any check on an unguarded square now is mate.
2...Nf2# Checkmate. This queen's sacrifice was also an example of a smothered mate.
In-between moves
Before 1... f2
24 | Chess
Tactics
After 2... Bb1! (white resigned)
An in-between move or Zwischenzug is one that is made unexpectedly in the midst of a
sequence of moves. But not just any series of moves, one in which the player falling for the
Zwischenzug feels the sequence is forced, while his opponent demonstrates to him that it certainly
isn't! Most commonly these fall in between trades where a recapture seems to be the only proper
means of play.
Such in-between moves often have a surprising and pleasing effect of increasing the potency of
a combination beyond the opponent's expectations.
Borisenkov-Mezenev (diagram, Black to play), went 1... f2, threatening to queen, which White
countered with 2. Rg8, intending 3. Rf8+, and 4. Rxf1. But White resigned after the zwischenzug
2... Bb1! which allows Black to queen (3. Kxb1 f1Q+ or 3. Rf8+ Bf5).
Wikibooks | 25
Chapter 4
4 STRATEGY
live version • discussion • edit lesson • comment • report an error • ask a question
Material
Having more material on the board than your opponent means you have more options available.
You have more opportunities to attack, more pieces to defend and will usually control more of the
board. Not all pieces have the same material value, however, so figuring out who has a material
advantage is not as easy as simply counting the white and black pieces on the board.
In general, the kings do not count when calculating a material advantage because your
opponent is guaranteed to also have a king and any attack on the king MUST be answered. You
can't trade a king for a rook, for example.
There is a lot of discussion about exactly what a piece is worth, but a reasonable place to start
is as follows:
Letting the pawn be the basic unit of value, you have the following relative values:
• Pawn = 1
• Knight = 3
• Bishop = 3
• Rook = 5
• Queen = 9
While the king's true value is infinite, in terms of its strength as an attacking piece in the
endgame it is generally reckoned to be stronger than a knight or bishop but weaker than a rook.
Clearly king activity is vital in an endgame.
From this we can generalize that trading a bishop for a knight is not usually harmful, but
trading a bishop for a rook is. We also see that trading a queen for 2 rooks is a good trade for the
side giving up the queen.
That being said, there are several things to consider when looking at the material strength of
any particular game:
In the end game, pawns gain strength as they advance because they pose the threat of queening,
so a pawn on the 6th or 7th rank is worth significantly more than a pawn on the second rank - often
as much as a piece. However, in the opening and middlegame, an advanced pawn is less likely to
queen and more likely to be in need of being defended. It is also unable to defend the center and
often leaves "holes" in your territory that can serve as outposts for your opponent's pieces. An
overadvanced pawn is then often a liability.
In the opening and middle game, pawns in the center of the board block paths and support
outposts. So they tend to be more valuable than end pawns. However, in the end game, a wing pawn
26 | Chess
Strategy
is usually the hardest to get to and block or capture and is therefore more likely to queen. So in the
endgame, the edge pawns are often more valuable than the middle pawns (Note: this is not
necessarily true in some basic pawn and king endings, where a pawn on the edge leads to only
drawing options).
A passed pawn has only pieces stopping it from queening, so it is considered more valuable -
especially if it is protected with other pawns.
Games are considered open, closed or semi closed based on whether the central pawns have
been captured or not. An open game is one where the central pawns are gone leaving long paths
from one side of the board to the other through the center. Bishops need long paths to reach full
strength, whereas knights shine when the board is cluttered because they can "jump" over pieces. So
in general, Bishops are stronger in open games and knights are stronger in closed.
Knights are more powerful if they have a safe outpost in enemy territory - a knight on the 6th
rank that can not be attacked by opposing pawns can be as powerful as a rook in the right
circumstances.
A bishop never leaves its own color, so if one of the bishops is captured, half the board is now
out of reach of a bishop. So trading 1 bishop for a knight tends to favor the person losing the knight,
who is left with two bishops. However, trading the second bishop isn't quite so hurtful. So trading a
Bishop for a Bishop where one side has only 1 bishop to begin with helps the side with fewer
bishops.
Knights can not cover both sides of the board at the same time, while a bishop can, so in an
endgame where there are pawns on both sides of the board, the bishop is stronger.
Bishops can not attack pawns that are on the opposite color, while a knight can. Furthermore, in
a game where there is a short pawn chain, a knight can stand at the head of the chain and attack the
pawn supporting it, so a knight is often more effective attacking pawns as long as they are limited to
one side of the board.
Usually more pieces are more valuable -- two bishops beats a rook, two rooks beat a queen --
but this is conditioned on proper co-ordination between the pieces. It may be worthwhile to sacrifice
two pieces for a rook if this results in long-term damage to the enemy's piece co-ordination. Usually
this means tying down the extra pieces to the defence of weak pawns, so that they cannot co-operate
in attacking friendly pawns.
Tempo
Tempo is the effective number of moves required to reach the position on the board. Moving a
piece twice to reach a position it could have reached in one results in a net loss of one tempo -
moving a piece back to its starting place usually results in a loss of all its tempo - unless other
pieces moved that could not have moved otherwise. Also the capture of a piece means all of the
tempo it gained is lost as well.
Wikibooks | 27
Chapter 4
Essentially, tempo is one way of showing how many effective moves you have made. So the
gain of a tempo is basically like getting a move for free. Three tempi is usually considered
equivalent to a pawn in terms of advantage.
Example:
In the position above there have been 2 tempi played on each side, play continues with:
3. cxd5 Nxd5 4. e4 Nf6
Now white still has 2 Tempi (one for d4 and 1 for e4) while black only has 1. The captured pieces
lost the tempo they had gained in moving and the knight lost the tempo it had when it captured.
28 | Chess
Strategy
For argument's sake, lets assume play went as follows:
5. e5 Nd5 6. Bc4 Nb6 7. Qd3 Na4 8. Nc3 Nxc3 9. Qxc3 e6
Now black still has only 1 tempo (e6) while white has 6 (2 queen moves, 3 pawn moves and a
bishop move). This has let white develop 2 pieces, control the center and give black a cramped
position. Also, while both sides can castle kingside in the same number of moves, White can
connect his rooks (position them so there is nothing between them on the back rank) 2 moves
sooner than black. Chances are, white will complete development and launch an attack before black
is able to. This means white will have an advantage when the middlegame is reached.
Quality
Pawn Structure
Pawn structure is often the backbone upon which the strategy in a game rests. There are several
things that need to be looked at when evaluating the pawn structure of a game. These include
whether the game is open or closed, open files, open diagonals, vulnerable potential outposts, pawn
islands, pawn chains, doubled pawns, backward pawns, passed pawns, protected passed pawns,
overall majorities, and local majorities.
A game is considered open if the center pawns (the ones on the d and e files) have been
captured. A closed game is where they have not been captured. In general, an open game means
pieces are able to move more easily through the center of the board, which leads to a more active
and generally tactical game. A closed game means that positional considerations are more
important. The players generally have more time to build a plan and the game, while often lasting
longer in general, often hinges on subtleties that are less likely to be noticed by novice players.
Wikibooks | 29
Chapter 4
Usually beginners are encouraged to strive for open games to improve their tactical ability and only
play closed games after they develop more of a feel for the game.
An open file is one with no pawns on it. This is basically a path for rooks to move on. This is
usually their most powerful position. Often play can focus on who gains control of a file because
this gives the person controlling it an advantage. A half open file is one where only the opponent's
pawn is on the file. This is often a good second choice for a rook because it attacks the pawn in
question and often opens up the rest of the way.
An open diagonal is again a diagonal with no pawns blocking it. This is one that a bishop can
traverse. Usually an open diagonal that travels through the center of the board is preferable because
it allows the bishop to move to the greatest degree (see also good vs. bad bishop).
A vulnerable potential outpost is a square in the opponent's territory that can not be defended
by an opponent's pawn. This is usually the result of a pawn that has been advanced too far or a
weakened pawn structure. Placing a knight on an outpost gives the knight attacking potential and
makes it a relatively stronger piece. Other pieces may also be placed on outposts as well.
A pawn island is any pawn or group of connected pawns separated from any other pawns by
an open or half open file. Having two or three pawn islands is usually necessary to activate your
rooks, but more than that indicates a weak pawn structure. The endpoints of pawn islands are
typically potential weaknesses and a large number of breaks in your pawn structure means there are
more places your opponent can penetrate into your territory.
A pawn chain is a set of pawns linked so each one is protected by a pawn behind it. Pawn
chains form on diagonals. Pawn chains often contribute to determining which side of the board a
player will try to open play up on (pawn chains point toward the direction that typically are attacked
because a bishop can be on the diagonal behind it. This allows the bishop to attack the opponents
side of the board without worrying about their pawns getting in the way and with relative safety
from opposing pieces that have to get around the pawn chain to attack the bishop. A pawn chain is
most effectively attacked at its base (the pawn that has no other pawns protecting it).
Doubled pawns are pawns on the same file. This happens when a pawn captures. Doubled
pawns often are seen as weaknesses because the lower pawn can not advance beyond the top one
and doubling pawns usually leads to openings into your own territory for the opponent to attack.
However, doubled pawns do have some advantages. For instance, a doubled pawn can advance
without leaving undefended outposts or backward pawns. Tripled pawns are always weaknesses.
A backward pawn is one with no adjacent pawns behind it or on the same rank. It often needs
to be defended with a piece and can not prevent an opposing piece from parking in front of it and
using that square as an outpost while preventing the pawn from being able to advance.
A passed pawn is a pawn that has no opposing pawn in front of it and is past any adjacent
opposing pawns. This pawn has the potential to advance to the 8th rank and queen. It can only be
stopped by an opposing piece or the king. A protected passed pawn is a passed pawn guarded by
another pawn. capturing the pawn still leaves you with a passed pawn on recapture. If the only
opposing piece is the king, neither pawn can safely be captured because that would put the king
behind the passed pawn. The passed pawn can then advance and the king will never be able to
30 | Chess
Strategy
"catch up" to capture the pawn. The pawn will then safely promote. If you have a passed pawn, you
may want to trade off pieces to protect it.
A pawn majority is where one person has more pawns than the other. It is an advantage
because it is likely to lead to a passed pawn. A player who is ahead a pawn or two may try to trade
off pieces and then get a passed pawn. A player with fewer pawns will try to hold onto his pieces in
case he needs to sacrifice one to prevent a pawn promotion.
A local pawn majority is a majority in one section of the board. If a player has a local pawn
majority, he may focus play on that side to get a passed pawn. If players have opposing pawn
majorities (e.g. one has a queenside pawn majority while the other has a kingside majority), each
side will try to restrict the other's play on their majority side while attempting to focus play on their
side in an attempt to get a passed pawn.
Active and passive pieces
An active piece is one that has the potential to make a threat. A passive one is usually relegated
to defending a piece (or worse - a pawn).
In this example, white's bishop on g5 is considered active, while black's bishop on e7 is considered
passive.
Piece activity depends on whether it can move and attack. A piece can be rendered passive if it
is stuck protecting another piece or if it is restricted from being able to get into play by its own
pawns.
Good vs. Bad Bishops
As noted above, a bishop can only travel on squares of one colour. This leads to a situation
Wikibooks | 31
Chapter 4
wherein one bishop may be effectively blocked out of the game by the pawn structure. In general it
is better to have your pawns on the opposite coloured squares to your bishop. For example, if you as
black have pawns on e6 and d5, your queen's bishop is likely to be a "bad bishop." It is bad because
it is hard to do anything constructive with it; developing it to g4 is impossible and "fianchettoing" it
via b7 is ineffective since your pawn on d5 blocks any influence it may have over the centre.
When one has a bad bishop there are two methods to improve the game: exchanging the
offender and freeing up the game. In general it is profitable to try to exchange your bad bishop for
an opponent's bishop or knight, as your bad bishop has little value. However, it is important to bear
in mind that in the end game having two bishops is considerably stronger than have two knights or a
bishop and a knight. Therefore you should always be wary of exchanging bishop for knight in
situations where an endgame is likely. The other method to rid yourself of this weakness is by
freeing up the game through making pawn moves.
Overloaded pieces
Overloaded pieces are pieces which defend too many other pieces and therefore cannot be
considered to defend all of them at once. For example, a rook can defend up to 4 pieces, but if one
is taken, and the rook takes the offending piece, 2 of the other pieces are undefended.
Initiative
The player with the initiative is the player who is making the threats to which the other person
must respond. Having the initiative is advantageous because it forces your opponent to place his
pieces in essentially defensive formations. A piece that is defending a square generally has less
mobility (freedom of movement) than a piece attacking the same square.
Having the first move, it is generally white who has the initiative in the early part of the game.
Therefore trying to maintain the initiative would be prudent strategy.
Compensation
Compensation is a term used in chess to describe the situation in which one player is materially
down but has advantages in position on the board that make up for this material deficiency.
Typically having compensation for a piece means that an attack against the enemy's king or
strong points cannot be repelled or may only be repelled by the enemy returning the material he is
up. Often compensation can refer to having the initiative or in trapping the opponents king in a
vulnerable position. A pawn majority on one wing or a passed pawn can also sometimes be
considered compensation for a minor piece. Generally the player who is down on material has to act
quickly and avoid exchanging pieces to prevent the enemy from making his material advantage
count.
32 | Chess
Strategy
Zugzwang
A Zugzwang situation that occurs when any move a player makes will weaken his/her position,
however, he/she is compelled to move in accordance to the rules. An example of the zugzwang is as
follows:
White moves the pawn, making a zugzwang and forcing Black's king to move.
Wikibooks | 33
Chapter 4
The black king is forced to move away from his current position because he now has no other
move.
34 | Chess
Strategy
White gains a queen and wins the game easily.
Combining attack with defense
A winning strategy in Chess often involves balancing several considerations against each other.
Moves that maximize immediate material gain might expose a vulnerability or yield a difficult
position as the game progresses. Similarly, material sacrifices for position may be disadvantageous
if they cannot be parlayed into an effective attack. Thus, a key consideration should be balancing
attack with defense. A profitable move would be one that both furthers your attack and solidifies
your defense.
Wikibooks | 35
Chapter 5
5 BASIC OPENINGS
live version • discussion • edit lesson • comment • report an error • ask a question
See also: Opening theory in chess
The following is an overview of the aims of an opening and some standard openings that you
can try in your games. All of them are playable and should lead to reasonable games with best play.
Aims of an opening
Before looking at some of the more common openings played today it is important to consider
what you are trying to achieve in the opening of a chess game.
In some cases, one player will sacrifice a pawn, or in some cases even more, to accomplish the
goals listed below. Such an opening is called a gambit.
Development
You should attempt to move your pieces away from their starting positions to squares in which
they can participate more fully in the game. Obviously a Knight at c3 is more effective both
defensively and aggressively than a knight on b1. Avoid moving pieces more than once in the
opening as this allows your opponent time to develop another piece while you are wasting time.
Also avoid moving your queen in the opening, it can too easily be chased around the board by other
pieces which aids your opponents development while wasting moves for you.
Control the Centre
The squares in the centre of the board are critical for 2 simple reasons. Firstly Pieces in the
centre are able to move to more squares than pieces on the edges. (Note a knight on a3 can move to
only 4 squares, whereas a knight on c3 can move to 8.) Secondly if you control the centre it is easier
to move pieces from Kingside to Queenside quickly.
One of the great truths in chess is that attacks along one wing are destined to fail if the centre is
not sufficiently controlled. This is because the defender with a strong centre will generally be able
to muster enough defence on that side and at the same time mount a counterattack in the centre
and/or on the other wing. So if you plan on mounting an attack make sure you control the centre
Traditionally it was thought that the ideal situation is one where you have a pawn majority in
the centre, especially with pawns on e4 and d4 (for white). However it has been shown that an
equally valid strategy is to control the centre with pieces and make minimal pawn moves. The
thinking is that central pawn moves often lead to permanent positions and can block attacks.
"Fianchettoing" a bishop by moving it to b2 or g2 after b3 or g3 allows the bishop to keep a
watchful eye on the centre without fixing a pawn in the centre.
Castle
36 | Chess
Basic Openings
A King in the centre of the board is open to attack. It is generally a good idea to castle your
king so as to be able to defend it easier. Some players will sacrifice material in order to prevent the
enemy king from castling and to attack it ferociously due to its vulnerability. Castling also has the
added benefit of bringing the rooks together on the first rank so that they are able to combine in
defence and attack. Once your pieces are developed, king is safely castled, and your rooks are
combined, the opening is over.
Protect the King
It is not always necessary although highly advisable to protect the king through castling. That
being said, there are other ways to go about protecting the king than castling although they are less
efficient and will often result in pins.
King's Pawn Openings
Spanish Opening (aka Ruy Lopez)
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bb5 the main line continues 3...a6 4.Ba4 Nf6 5.0-0
The move 3...a6 works because if white plays 4.Bxc6 dxc6, 5.Nxe5 will fall to 5...Qd4, forking
the pawn and the knight.
Wikibooks | 37
Chapter 5
Italian Game
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bc4
There are two key replies: 3...Bc5, known as the Giuoco Piano (Italian for Quiet Game), and
3...Nf6 headed to a much more involved opening called the Two Knights Defence.
School children in local clubs often drift into weaker variants of the Giuoco Piano, mostly out
of insufficient knowledge. A few scholastic trainers have even suggested avoiding the opening, as
there are fewer crisp strategic concepts compared to many other openings.
38 | Chess
Basic Openings
Russian Game (aka Petroff's Defence)
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nf6
The Petroff Defense may look like a counter-attack, and very early on this was supposed to be
the idea. However, it soon became apparent that the symmetrical nature of the opening produced
defensive positions. It is considered quite solid, and is a key defensive opening against the
dangerous first move 1. e4. There are a few gambits which White can try to shift the style of the
opening. The Cochrane gambit is perhaps the most dangerous. It involves a Knight sacrifice on f7.
Currently not considered objectively sound, its use is psychological: White dares the opponent to
spend twenty moves defending against an attack, and this pressure may cause the Black player to
finally fall victim to a tactical shot.
Philidor Defence
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 d6
Wikibooks | 39
Chapter 5
If Black wants to defend the threatened pawn with a pawn, this is the way to do it (playing
2...f6? is plain bad). It gives Black a solid but somewhat cramped position. The f8 bishop is
hemmed in and will be relegated to a defensive role. The Black knight retains the option of going to
d7 leaving the c-pawn mobile, but it is not without reason that 2...Nc6 is much more common than
2...d6.
Danish Gambit
1.e4 e5 2.d4 exd4 3.c3 dxc3 4.Bc4 cxb2 5.Bxb2
This gambit gives White quick development and control of the center at the cost of two pawns
initially. However, current opinion reports that to properly beat off the attacking waves, at least one
and sometimes both pawns must be returned. This involves the liberating pawn push ...d5 by Black.
Even so, inventive attacking players can still use the resulting open lines to play a complex game.
Sicilian Defence
1.e4 c5
40 | Chess
Basic Openings
Play can continue.
2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 (2...d6 and 2...e6 are also common, and usually also met by 3.d4)
The Sicilian is the most common and best-scoring response to 1.e4, as it balances the white
advantage with flank play. It discourages White from occupying the centre with 2.d4. After 2...cxd4
White must either take the pawn back with the queen (and move it again after 3.Qxd4 Nc6) or
sacrifice the pawn, usually with 3.c3.
One problem with the Sicilian is that there is a vast amount of theory written on it, and in a
sharp opening like this, you can wind up in trouble if you don't know it.
French Defence
1.e4 e6 2.d4 d5
White has three essential continuations: 3.Nc3 "Winawer Variation" 3.Nd2 "Tarrasch
Variation" 3.e5 "Advance Variation".
A fourth alternative, the "Exchange Variation" is 3. exd5, but this actually frees Black's game
Wikibooks | 41
Chapter 5
from all of the traditional cramping problems of the French Defence. It is mainly used by White
players who forgo all attempts at a theoretical battle, hoping to play on "general principles".
The French Defence is considered one of the strongest black responses to the White opening
move 1.e4. Among world class grandmasters, it currently trails the Sicilian 1. e4 c5 and the
symmetrical 1.e4 e5 in popularity.
Pirc Defence
1.e4 d6, usually followed by 2.d4 Nf6 3.Nc3 g6
This opening bears considerable similarities to another one called the King's Indian, which
begins 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7. However, subtle but long range strategic differences exist
between the two. In the Pirc, White's c-file pawn is still at home, and not committed to the c4
square. This means that overall, White has better control of the d4 square. The pawn move c2-c4
has been replaced by a developing piece move N-c3, and this "faster" development tends to
encourage White towards central or kingside attacks compared with the queenside play classically
associated with the King's Indian defense.
42 | Chess
Basic Openings
Modern Defence
1.e4 g6, usually followed by 2.d4 Bg7
This move order is often used to "back into" a Pirc defense, while avoiding specific move order
issues. However, an entirely different range of strategy is possible based upon ...c6 and ...d5.
Wikibooks | 43
Chapter 5
Alekhine's Defence
1.e4 Nf6, usually followed by 2.e5 Nd5 3.d4 d6
This looks like a rather alarming opening for Black to play. Black lets White chase the knight
around the board and use that time to build up the pawn centre. Black's plan is to show that White
has expanded too quickly, and will find the pawn centre vulnerable. The disadvantage to this
opening is that if White succeeds in maintaining it, White will have a serious and suffocating
advantage in space.
44 | Chess
Basic Openings
Scandinavian Defence
1.e4 d5, usually followed by 2.exd5 Qxd5 3.Nc3 Qa5
Playing d7-d5 is the main idea behind most of the semi-open games for black. Here it is played
immediately for the price of an extra move with the queen after 3.Nc3.
Long disparaged as the epitome of weak play "because moving the queen early wastes time", it
was resurrected in the 1990s with a pawn move c7-c6, allowing the queen to retreat from a5 to c7
when necessary. Now it is considered an attempt to reduce White's central pressure, and is popular
among club players because White suddenly has to demonstrate some sophistication.
Wikibooks | 45
Chapter 5
Queen's Pawn Openings
Queen's Gambit
1.d4 d5 2. c4
46 | Chess
Basic Openings
2...e6 3.Nc3 Nf6 4.Bg5 Be7 leads to "Queen's Gambit Declined" variations.
2...c6 (usually followed by 3.Nf3 Nf6 4.Nc3 dxc4) leads to the "Slav Defence".
This is one of the opening "families" with interchangeable moves. It is quite possible to play
both ...e6 and ...c6 (known as the Semi-Slav), and there are large numbers of interchangeable points
called transpositions.
Wikibooks | 47
Chapter 5
2...dxc4 is the "Queen's Gambit Accepted".
Black has gained a pawn but Blace cannot keep it. If White wants it back White can play e2-e3
at some point, threatening the pawn with the bishop and if Black tries to defend it with ...b5 Black
will find the queenside severely weakened (and the pawn should fall anyway). Nonetheless, this is
playable for Black as well, instead of trying to keep the pawn, it is best to develop quickly and
strike back at the White centre.
King's Indian Defence
1.d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6
48 | Chess
Basic Openings
3.Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6
Popularised after World War II, the King's Indian Defence involves opposite sides strategies in
a race between Black's mating attack vs. White's methodical attempts to unravel Black's Queenside.
Wikibooks | 49
Chapter 5
At World Class level, there is some concern that Black's concept is very committal, leading
Former Champion Garry Kasparov to discontinue his use of the opening shortly before he retired
from the game. At any level below that, it is still very popular due to the deep developmental work
by Fischer and Kasparov.
Grünfeld Defence
1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6
50 | Chess
Basic Openings
3.Nc3 d5
Looks a bit like a cross between the Queen's Gambit and the King's Indian Defense, but this
opening is played differently from both of them. Black gives White an early opportunity to grab
control of the centre with 4.cxd5 Nxd5 5.e4. Black will need to launch a counterattack against that
centre, perhaps with ...c5 to stop White from getting the upper hand. If Black succeeds, the White
centre may indeed be very vulnerable, if Blacks fails, the centre will be very dominating.
Nimzo-Indian Defence
1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6
Wikibooks | 51
Chapter 5
3.Nc3 Bb4
After 3.Nc3, White threatens to take control over the centre by playing 4.e4. The NimzoIndian, named after the hypermodern player Aron Nimzowitch, is one of the two main ways of
preventing this (the other way is the direct 3...d5 which leads to the Queen's Gambit Declined).
Black puts a bishop where it pins the White knight, and often intends to trade it off, surrendering the
bishop pair but inflicting White with doubled pawns if needed to recapture with the b-pawn. White
can avoid these doubled pawns by playing the queen to c2, but this costs time. On the other hand,
Black has not staked out a big claim of the centre yet, and White can get a real space advantage if
Black is careless.
52 | Chess
Basic Openings
Queen's Indian Defence
1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6
3.Nf3 b6
Wikibooks | 53
Chapter 5
Strategically, this opening is similar to the Nimzo-Indian. White has played 3.Nf3 rather than
3.Nc3 so he is not threatening to grab the center with 4.e4 just yet. Playing the Nimzo-like 3...Bb4+
anyway is possible (and called the Bogo-Indian) and tends to lead to rather quiet play. More usual is
3...b6 which opens up for the bishop to go to b7 where it will continue the clamp-down on the e4-
square, or to a6 where it will put pressure on White's pawn on c4.
Modern Benoni
1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 c5
54 | Chess
Basic Openings
3.d5 e6
Benko Gambit
1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 c5
Wikibooks | 55
Chapter 5
3.d5 b5
Other openings
English Opening
1.c4
56 | Chess
Basic Openings
Black's most common responses are:
1...e5, a reversed Sicilian Defence
1...c5
Wikibooks | 57
Chapter 5
1...Nf6
1...e6 (preparing 2...d5)
58 | Chess
Basic Openings
and 1...c6 (preparing 2...d5)
Réti Opening
1.Nf3 d5 2.c4
Wikibooks | 59
Chapter 5
King's Indian Attack
1.Nf3 d5 2.g3
60 | Chess
The Endgame
6 THE ENDGAME
live version • discussion • edit lesson • comment • report an error • ask a question
Basic Checkmates
These include positions that have no pawns. When one side is ahead in material and has pawns,
the easiest winning plan is typically to queen one or more pawns and use them to checkmate.
The situations where one has a king and queen, or king and rook, versus a lone king occur very
often and it is essential to know how checkmate is achieved in such cases. The other cases, with
minor pieces (bishops and knights) are much more rare, but are covered here for completeness.
King and Queen vs. King
Sample starting position for K+Q vs. K mate
Delivering checkmate with a king and queen against a lone king is quite easy. The basic
technique involves driving the king to the edge of the board, which the queen can do by herself. It's
faster if you use your king and queen together, but this increases the probability of a stalemate, so
beginners should do it without the king. The technique described below will accomplish the mate in
about 10 to 15 moves.
Here's an example (see diagram on right):
1.Qb5
Cutting the black king off along the fifth rank.
1...Ke6
Wikibooks | 61
Chapter 6
1...Kc7 2.Qa6 limits Black's king to the last two ranks.
Position after 2.Qc5
2.Qc5 (see diagram)
During this phase, notice how White's queen always stays a knight's move away from the black
king, and how no checks are necessary (or even desirable). Moves like 2.Qc6+? only allow Black's
king more freedom after 2...Ke5.
2...Kf6 3.Qd5 Kg6 4.Qe5 Kf7
After 4...Kh6 5.Qg3 White's goal has been achieved: the black king is trapped on the edge.
White will then bring his king to f6 to force mate.
5.Qd6 Kg7 6.Qe6 Kh7
Black's king is forced to the edge of the board no matter what he does, e.g. 6...Kf8 7.Qd7.
62 | Chess
The Endgame
Position after 8.Kb2
7.Qg4 Kh6 8.Kb2 (see diagram)
Now that Black's king is stuck, the white monarch comes in to finish off his adversary.
8...Kh7 9.Kc3
9.Qg5 doesn't spoil anything, but it isn't necessary. Unlike the king and rook vs. king mate,
here Black's king doesn't have to be trapped in the corner.
9...Kh8 10.Kd4
10 Qg6=?? stalemate was what Black was hoping for. Beware of this trap!
10...Kh7 11.Ke5 Kh8 12.Kf6 Kh7 13.Qg7#.
A detailed analysis of this endgame based on the computer-generated database is in Analysis of
KQK Endgame. This shows that for any "King and Queen vs. King" endgame, white to move can
force checkmate in at most ten moves.
King and Rook vs. King
Sample starting position for K+R vs. K
mate
This mate takes longer to do than king and queen vs. king, because the king and rook have to
work together to trap the opposing king on the edge (often in the corner). The most commonly
taught technique involves confining the opposing king into a box using the rook, which is protected
by its own king. Then, the box becomes smaller and smaller until the king is forced into the corner.
From the diagram on the right:
Wikibooks | 63
Chapter 6
1.Kc2 Ke5 2.Kd3 Kd5 3.Ra4 Ke5
After the king's position is improved, the box can be constructed:
4.Rd4
The box is d8-d4-h4.
Position after 5.Re4
4...Kf5 5.Re4 (see diagram)
Now it's e8-e4-h4.
5...Kf6 6.Kd4
The box can't be reduced immediately, so the king creeps closer.
6...Kf5 7.Kd5 Kf6
7...Kg5 8.Ke6 Kg6 9.Rf4 Kg5 10.Ke5 Kg6 11.Rf5 Kg7 12.Rf6 Kg8 13.Kf5 Kg7 14.Kg5 Kh7
15.Rg6 Kh8 16.Kf6 Kh7 17.Kf7 Kh8 18.Rg6# is similar.
64 | Chess
The Endgame
8.Re5
Position after 15.Kf7
Back to shrinking the box: the process repeats itself. Notice that just as in K+Q vs. K, no
checks are necessary until the actual mate.
8...Kf7 9.Re6 Kg7 10.Ke5 Kf7 11.Kf5 Kg7 12.Rf6 Kh7 13.Rg6 Kh8 14.Kf6 Kh7 15.Kf7
(see diagram)
Something important to know: if it somehow transpires that White reaches this position but it's
his turn to move, all he has to do is move the rook anywhere along the sixth rank (except Rh6+ of
course!). Then, Black's king is forced to move to h8, and White gives checkmate with Rh6#.
15...Kh8 16.Rh6#.
The alternative method is based on the opposition of the kings (see below) with the rook being far
away. From the same starting position as before:
1.Kc2 Ke5 2.Kd3 Kd5
Once again, White must improve the position of his king first. Now, once the kings are in
opposition, he checks along the fifth rank to push the black king back.
Wikibooks | 65
Chapter 6
Position after 2...Kd5
3.Ra5+ (see diagram)
Black has no choice but to give ground.
3...Kc6 4.Kd4 Kb6
4...Kd6 5.Ra6+ immediately cuts Black off the sixth rank.
5.Rg5 Kc6 6.Rh5 Kd6
6...Kb6 7.Kc4 Kc6 8.Rh6+ is the same sort of thing.
7.Rh6+ Ke7 8.Kd5 Kf7 9.Ke5 Kg7 10.Rb6 Kf7 11.Ra6 Ke7 12.Ra7+ Kd8 13.Ke6 Kc8
14.Kd6 Kb8 15.Rg7 Kc8 16.Rh7 Kb8 17.Kc6 Ka8 18.Kb6 Kb8 19.Rh8#.
Using either method, it should take about 15-20 moves to deliver the mate. Theoretically, it
should take no longer than 16 moves to checkmate, but depending on the position, one might have
to use a mixture of the two techniques to do this.
Minor Piece Checkmates
If white has only one minor piece against a lone king, it is not possible to arrange the pieces so
that the black king is checkmated. If white has three pieces, the mate is easy. As we shall see, with
two bishops white's job is relatively easy, with a bishop and knight it is somewhat harder, and with
two knights it is typically impossible.
66 | Chess
The Endgame
White to play
The diagram at left shows a mate in 6 with two bishops.
1. Bc2 Kf1 2. Bd2 Kg1 3. Kg3 Kf1 4. Bd3+ Kg1 5. Be3+ Kh1 6. Be4#
If on the third move, black plays, Kh1, instead of Kf1, white responds with the line: 4. Be1 Kg1
5. Bf2 Kh2 6. Be4++
One other possibility remains. If 5. Bf2 Kf1, then white should respond: 6. Bd3++
The bishops coordinate by taking adjacent diagonals, thus cutting off the opposing king.
White to play
In order to mate with a bishop and knight, white must force black's king to the corner that is the
same color as his bishop - in this case the a8 square. This is not so easy to do, because the bishop
and knight do not coordinate well in cutting off the opponent's king. Mate can always be forced
unless black can win a white piece, but, even with best play, the mate may take over 30 moves.
Wikibooks | 67
Chapter 6
In the position at right, much of the hard work has already been done. Black is being pressed in
the direction of the a8 corner. Nevertheless, nine more moves are required to mate.
1. Kd6 Kc8 2. Ke7 Kb7 3. Kd7 Kb8 4. Ba6 Ka7 5. Bc8 Kb8 6. Ne7 Ka7 (or 6. ... Ka8 7. Kc7
Ka7 8. Nc6+ Ka8 9. Bb7++ ) 7. Kc7 Ka8 8. Bb7+ Ka7 9. Nc6++
White to play
When white has two knights against a bare king, it is impossible to mate without cooperation
from black. The diagram at left illustrates his predicament. The black king is cornered, but white
has no way to force checkmate. Moving either Nf3, or moving Nh3 all lead to stalemate. White can
try for 1. Ne4 Kg1 2. Nf3+ Kh1?? 3. Nf2++, but instead black plays 2. ... Kf1 3. Nd4 (otherwise
black can play Ke2, and white must corner him again) Ke1 and white still has a challenge to confine
the black king.
If black has one or more pawn, white may be able to win by cornering the black king with a
king and one knight, and avoiding stalemate by letting black to advance his pawn, while the other
knight administers mate. A number of such chess endings have been composed, some of which
require as many 70 moves without a pawn move or capture. These compositions have some historic
interest - they lead to the amendment of the "50 move draw rule" to exclude those positions in
which it could be demonstrated that more moves were required.
Pawn Endings
Two important concepts in endgames only involving the kings and pawns are the rule of the
square and the opposition.
A passed pawn is a pawn that cannot be stopped from queening by an opponent's pawn. If both
sides have one or more passed pawns, then the player with a protected passed pawn (protected by
another pawn) is likely to have an advantage. If neither side has a protected passed pawn, then the
player with an outside passed pawn (farthest from the other pawns) will most likely win.
68 | Chess
The Endgame
The Rule of the Square
The Rule of the Square
The Rule of the Square is used to determine whether or not a passed pawn can queen when it
is not supported by its own king and the enemy king is chasing it. The idea is shown by the diagram
on the right:
One side of the square is the line that extends from the pawn to the square on which it queens.
The rule says: if the enemy king can reach the square of the pawn, then it can capture the pawn; if
not, the pawn can queen without the aid of its own king. Remember that if the pawn is on its starting
square, it can make a double step, so the square is the same as if the pawn has advanced one square.
The rule is valid for all pawns, including rook's pawns.
So, in the diagram, if it's White's turn to move, then Black's king is outside the square and
White can queen: 1.e6 Kb5 2.e7 Kc6 3.e8Q+.
If Black is to play, the pawn can't escape the king: 1...Kb5! (moving into the square) 2.e6
Kc6 3.e7 Kd7 4.e8Q+ Kxe8 =.
Wikibooks | 69
Chapter 6
The rule assumes that there is nothing stopping the king from taking the shortest route to chase
the pawn. If there are pawns that might get in the way of the king then the rule does not apply:
The position is the same as the first one, except that now there is a black pawn on c6. This
pawn gets in the way of its own king, so that even if it's Black's turn to move he still loses: 1...Kb5
(1...c5 2.e6! and Black's king cannot get into the c8-c6-e6-e8 square) 2.e6 Kb6 3.e7 Kc7 4.e8Q.
The rule of the square can form a basis for tactics. In the position on the right, Black to move
played 1...Kb4, entering the square of White's f-pawn. He thought that this would be good enough
for a draw, but White played 2.d6!. After 2...cxd6 3.f5 the effect of White's sacrifice is clear: he has
decoyed Black's pawn to the a3-f8 diagonal, where it obstructs Black's king. Now White simply
promotes the pawn and wins. Black had no other choice but to take White's d-pawn on his second
move as otherwise it would have queened.
The Opposition
When the two Kings stand next to each other so that there is one square between them, they are
said to oppose each other (or to be in opposition). Because the rules of chess say that the King can't
step to a square next to the opposite King, there is an invisible wall between the Kings that makes it
impossible for them to advance forwards.
The player who is not to move in such situation is said to have the opposition. Since his
opponent can't move his King forwards, he has to move it sideways or backwards, and after that the
other player gets to advance his King forwards, which is usually advantageous for him.
70 | Chess
The Endgame
The kings are in opposition
Let's consider the very simple position on the right that illustrates the opposition:
If Black is to move, White has the opposition. Black can't move his King forwards, so he might
play 1...Kd6 (1...Kf6 is the same in mirror image). Now the f5-square becomes available for the
white King, so White's next move is 2. Kf5. If Black now moves his King to e7, White responds by
moving his King to e5, when a position similar to the starting position has arisen, with the exception
that the white King has advanced one square forwards and thus forced the black King to retreat one
square.
Now you might wonder what is the advantage of having the opposition. Let's add a Pawn to the
previous position, and we get an example of how to queen the Pawn with the aid of the opposition
(see diagram on right):
Black to move, White wins. White to move draws.
Now Black plays 1...Kd6, as in the previous example. White's first move is also the same,
2.Kf5, advancing his King forwards. The play might go on 2...Kd7 3.Kf6 Kd6. Now it seems that
Wikibooks | 71
Chapter 6
Black has the opposition, but we shouldn't forget that White doesn't have to move his King.
Therefore the right move is 4.e4, when Black has to concede the opposition. Now White wins after
4...Kd7 5.e5 Ke8 6.Ke6 Kd8 7. Kf7 Kd7 8.e6+ Kd6 9.e7 and the Pawn queens next move.
Draw, whoever moves.
This position might look like a simple win with White to move as well. However, in this case,
the game is drawn. Black has the opposition, and he can use it to block the Pawn (if he is careful
and doesn't blunder the opposition away). Play could begin with 1.Kf4 Kf6 2. e4 Ke6!. This is the
only move that holds the draw. In this kind of position, when the defending King can't oppose the
enemy King, he must never move backwards. Instead he always has to move sideways, and always
to the file on which the opponent's Pawn stands. If Black had now played 2...Ke7?, White would
have gained the opposition with 3.Ke5, and won the game as in the previous example. After 2...Ke6
White has no way to force the Pawn through as long as Black carefully keeps the opposition. The
play could continue 3.e5 Ke7 4.Kf5 Kf7 5.e6 Ke8 6.Kf6 Kf8 7.e7 Ke8 8.Ke6 stalemate.
You need more than just a pawn and the opposition to win though. Take the position at right.
Unlike the previous one, White's king is behind the pawn, and this is enough to ensure black a draw.
Assuming black to move (so white has the opposition) the game might continue 1. ... Kd7 2. Kc5
Kc7 3. d6+ Kd7 4. Kd5 Kd8 5. Kc6 Kc8 6. d7+ Kd8 7. Kd6 stalemate.
72 | Chess
The Endgame
Draw, whoever moves.
Even if one side has a pawn advantage, his king is in front of the pawn, and he has the
opposition, it may not be enough to win. A notable exception is shown at right, namely the rook
pawn. Unlike the previous case, there is nothing white can do to force black out of the corner - thus
his pawn can never queen.
Outside Passed Pawn
White wins.
The position at right is a good example of an outside passed pawn. It is not that the pawn is at
the edge of the board - it is the fact that this pawn is far away from the other pawns, and acts as a
decoy. It is often the case that in positions with an equal number of pawns that an outside passed
pawn is sufficient advantage to win.
Take the position at right as an example. White advances his passed pawn, and when the black
king is far away, he captures all the black pawns, and queens his remaining pawn.
Wikibooks | 73
Chapter 6
1. f5 Kd6 2. f6 Ke6 3. Kxc5 Kxf6 4. Kb6 Ke6 5. Kxa6 Kd7 6. Kb7 and the pawn queens.
Protected Passed Pawn
White wins.
White's c pawn is a protected passed pawn - enough to win in this position, even when black
has an outside passed pawn. White could easily fritter away this advantage, and even lose, after 1.
c6+?? Kc7 2. Kc5 f5 3. Kd5 f4 4. Ke4 Kxc6 5. Kxf5 Kd5 6. Ke3 Kc4 (the outside passed pawn
prevailed). The correct strategy is for White to threaten the f pawn with his king, and then trade the
c pawn for the f pawn in such a way that he gets the opposition. Black cannot counter by attacking
White's other pawns, because then the c pawn will queen.
1. Ke5 Ke7 2. c6 Kd8 3. Kf6 Kc7 4. Kxf7 Kxc6 5. Ke6 Kc7 6. Kd5 Kb6 7. Kd6 Kb7 8. Kc5
Ka6 9. Kc6 wins both pawns
Probably better is the fighting alternative 1. Ke5 Kc6 2. Kf6 Kd5 3. Kxf7 Kc4 4. c6 Kb3 5. c7
Kxa3 6. c8/Q Kxb4 7. Qe6 but white has no trouble stopping the black pawns and mating.
74 | Chess
The Endgame
Draw.
If the protected passed pawn is not so far advanced, it confers less of an advantage. The
position at right, which has most of the pieces moved back two rows, actually provides Black with a
slight advantage, but not enough to win against best defense. Black uses his outside passed pawn as
a decoy, and then queens his b pawn, while white queens his c pawn.
1. Ke3 Kc4 2. Ke2 (trying to stop black from penetrating) f4 3. Kd2 f3 4. Ke3 f2 5. Kxf2 Kd3
6. Kf3 Kc2 7. c4 Kxb2 8. c5 Kxa3 9. c6 b2 10. c7 b1/Q 11. c8/Q
Black is a pawn up in an ending with queens on the board. Black has an opportunity to play for
a win, but such endings are generally drawn.
External Links
• View endgames involving the King+Knight+Pawn vs. King+Knight+Pawn
• View endgames involving the King+Pawn vs. King+Pawn
• View endgames involving the King+Queen+Pawn vs. King+Queen+Pawn
• View endgames involving the King+Rook+Pawn vs. King+Rook+Pawn
• View endgames involving the King+Bishop+Pawn vs. King+Bishop+Pawn
Wikibooks | 75
Chapter 7
7 HISTORY & DOCUMENT NOTES
Wikibook History
This book was created on 2004-01-31 and was developed on the Wikibooks project by the
contributors listed in the next section. The latest version may be found at
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Chess.
PDF Information & History
This PDF was created on 2006-07-17 based on the 2006-07-16 version of the Wikibook. A
transparent copy of this document is available at Wikibooks:Chess/Printable version. An
OpenDocument Text version of this PDF document and the template from which it was created is
available upon request at Wikibooks:User talk:Hagindaz. A printer-friendly version of this
document may be available at Wikibooks:Image:Chess_printable_version.pdf.
Document Information
• Pages: 84
• Paragraphs: 7642
• Words: 16405
• Characters: 97952
76 | Chess
Authors, Bibliography, & Image Credits
8 AUTHORS, BIBLIOGRAPHY, & IMAGE
CREDITS
Principal Authors
• WarrenWilkinson (Contributions)
• Dysprosia (Contributions)
• Darvian (Contributions)
• Tm chk (Contributions)
• Bill Alexander (Contributions)
• Author (Contributions)
• Author (Contributions)
All Authors, number of edits
• Title Page: Anonymous,76 – WarrenWilkinson,52 – Dysprosia,13 - Chi Sigma,5 - Siroxo,3 - RobinH,2 - ZeroOne,2 -
Hagindaz,2 - Garrett,2 - SamE,2 - Nielmo,2 - Wereon,2 - Derbeth,2 - Jlapointe,1 - Darvian,1 - Jguk,1 - Poiuyt Man,1 - ABCD,1 -
LukeMeyers,1 - ThreeE,1 - Donarreiskoffer,1 - Cryptic,1 - Robert Horning,1 - ComplexZeta,1 - Gmcfoley,1 - Plaicy,1 - Eibwen,1 -
BimBot,1 - Hehelol,1 – Adam7davies,1
• Chapter 01: Playing the Game: Anonymous,42 - Darvian,7 - Bill Alexander,4 - Dragontamer,3 - Yorktown1776,3 -
Chessmaniac,3 - SamE,2 - Timwi,2 - Chvsanchez,1 - Chi Sigma,1 - Orderud,1 - Jokes Free4Me,1 - Hagindaz,1 - SimRPGman,1 - G4sxe,1
- Gmcfoley,1 - LeoTR,1 - Derbeth,1 - Snehalppatel,1 - Julians,1 - BimBot,1 - Strongbad,1 - ZeroOne,1 - Michael Slone,1 - Nadir1984,1
• Chapter 02: Notating the Game: Anonymous,11 - DSYoungEsq,4 - Orderud,2 - Chvsanchez,2 - SimRPGman,1 -
Chi Sigma,1 - Gmcfoley,1 - Seahen,1 - BimBot,1 - Hagindaz,1 - Darvian,1 - Robert Horning,1
• Chapter 03: Tactics: Anonymous,31 - Jokes Free4Me,5 - Bjimba,3 - Orderud,2 - Strongbad,2 - BimBot,1 - ZeroOne,1 -
Kb1cvh,1 - Hagindaz,1 - Darvian,1 - Popski,1 - Chvsanchez,1 - Sim man,1 - Snarius,1 - SimRPGman,1 - IRelayer,1
• Chapter 04: Strategy: Anonymous,54 - Orderud,2 - Jokes Free4Me,2 - ZeroOne,2 - IRelayer,1 - Hagindaz,1 - Darvian,1 -
Popski,1 - Strongbad,1 - Juan Ponderas,1 - Chvsanchez,1 - Magicmonster,1 - Justplainuncool,1 - SimRPGman,1
• Chapter 05: Basic Openings: Anonymous,41 - Sjakkalle,7 - Secular mind,6 - Regre7,5 - Chvsanchez,3 - Orderud,2 -
BimBot,1 - Fz5791,1 - Bill Alexander,1 - JECompton,1 - Hagindaz,1 - Darvian,1 - SimRPGman,1 - LeoTR,1
• Chapter 06: The Endgame: Anonymous,39 - Tm chk,20 - Bill Alexander,13 - WalterC,2 - Derbeth,2 - Chessmaniac,2
- Orderud,2 - Hagindaz,1 - Darvian,1 - SimRPGman,1 - Jokes Free4Me,1
Image Credits
Cover: ChessSet by Alan Light. (GFDL)
Chessboard squares and pieces: Created by created by Arvindn and Klin and other
members of WikiProject Chess, Some shapes were copied from the program xBoard.
Released under either GPL or GFDL.
Wikibooks | 77
Chapter 9
9 GNU FREE DOCUMENTATION LICENSE
Version 1.2, November 2002
Copyright (C) 2000,2001,2002 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
51 Franklin St, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA
Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.
0. PREAMBLE
The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other functional and useful
document "free" in the sense of freedom: to assure everyone the effective freedom to copy and
redistribute it, with or without modifying it, either commercially or noncommercially. Secondarily,
this License preserves for the author and publisher a way to get credit for their work, while not
being considered responsible for modifications made by others.
This License is a kind of "copyleft", which means that derivative works of the document must
themselves be free in the same sense. It complements the GNU General Public License, which is a
copyleft license designed for free software.
We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for free software, because free
software needs free documentation: a free program should come with manuals providing the same
freedoms that the software does. But this License is not limited to software manuals; it can be used
for any textual work, regardless of subject matter or whether it is published as a printed book. We
recommend this License principally for works whose purpose is instruction or reference.
1. APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS
This License applies to any manual or other work, in any medium, that contains a notice placed
by the copyright holder saying it can be distributed under the terms of this License. Such a notice
grants a world-wide, royalty-free license, unlimited in duration, to use that work under the
conditions stated herein. The "Document", below, refers to any such manual or work. Any member
of the public is a licensee, and is addressed as "you". You accept the license if you copy, modify or
distribute the work in a way requiring permission under copyright law.
A "Modified Version" of the Document means any work containing the Document or a portion
of it, either copied verbatim, or with modifications and/or translated into another language.
A "Secondary Section" is a named appendix or a front-matter section of the Document that
deals exclusively with the relationship of the publishers or authors of the Document to the
Document's overall subject (or to related matters) and contains nothing that could fall directly
within that overall subject. (Thus, if the Document is in part a textbook of mathematics, a
Secondary Section may not explain any mathematics.) The relationship could be a matter of
78 | Chess
GNU Free Documentation License
historical connection with the subject or with related matters, or of legal, commercial,
philosophical, ethical or political position regarding them.
The "Invariant Sections" are certain Secondary Sections whose titles are designated, as being
those of Invariant Sections, in the notice that says that the Document is released under this License.
If a section does not fit the above definition of Secondary then it is not allowed to be designated as
Invariant. The Document may contain zero Invariant Sections. If the Document does not identify
any Invariant Sections then there are none.
The "Cover Texts" are certain short passages of text that are listed, as Front-Cover Texts or
Back-Cover Texts, in the notice that says that the Document is released under this License. A FrontCover Text may be at most 5 words, and a Back-Cover Text may be at most 25 words.
A "Transparent" copy of the Document means a machine-readable copy, represented in a
format whose specification is available to the general public, that is suitable for revising the
document straightforwardly with generic text editors or (for images composed of pixels) generic
paint programs or (for drawings) some widely available drawing editor, and that is suitable for input
to text formatters or for automatic translation to a variety of formats suitable for input to text
formatters. A copy made in an otherwise Transparent file format whose markup, or absence of
markup, has been arranged to thwart or discourage subsequent modification by readers is not
Transparent. An image format is not Transparent if used for any substantial amount of text. A copy
that is not "Transparent" is called "Opaque".
Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain ASCII without markup,
Texinfo input format, LaTeX input format, SGML or XML using a publicly available DTD, and
standard-conforming simple HTML, PostScript or PDF designed for human modification. Examples
of transparent image formats include PNG, XCF and JPG. Opaque formats include proprietary
formats that can be read and edited only by proprietary word processors, SGML or XML for which
the DTD and/or processing tools are not generally available, and the machine-generated HTML,
PostScript or PDF produced by some word processors for output purposes only.
The "Title Page" means, for a printed book, the title page itself, plus such following pages as
are needed to hold, legibly, the material this License requires to appear in the title page. For works
in formats which do not have any title page as such, "Title Page" means the text near the most
prominent appearance of the work's title, preceding the beginning of the body of the text.
A section "Entitled XYZ" means a named subunit of the Document whose title either is
precisely XYZ or contains XYZ in parentheses following text that translates XYZ in another
language. (Here XYZ stands for a specific section name mentioned below, such as
"Acknowledgements", "Dedications", "Endorsements", or "History".) To "Preserve the Title" of
such a section when you modify the Document means that it remains a section "Entitled XYZ"
according to this definition.
The Document may include Warranty Disclaimers next to the notice which states that this
License applies to the Document. These Warranty Disclaimers are considered to be included by
reference in this License, but only as regards disclaiming warranties: any other implication that
these Warranty Disclaimers may have is void and has no effect on the meaning of this License.
Wikibooks | 79
Chapter 9
2. VERBATIM COPYING
You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either commercially or
noncommercially, provided that this License, the copyright notices, and the license notice saying
this License applies to the Document are reproduced in all copies, and that you add no other
conditions whatsoever to those of this License. You may not use technical measures to obstruct or
control the reading or further copying of the copies you make or distribute. However, you may
accept compensation in exchange for copies. If you distribute a large enough number of copies you
must also follow the conditions in section 3.
You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above, and you may publicly
display copies.
3. COPYING IN QUANTITY
If you publish printed copies (or copies in media that commonly have printed covers) of the
Document, numbering more than 100, and the Document's license notice requires Cover Texts, you
must enclose the copies in covers that carry, clearly and legibly, all these Cover Texts: Front-Cover
Texts on the front cover, and Back-Cover Texts on the back cover. Both covers must also clearly
and legibly identify you as the publisher of these copies. The front cover must present the full title
with all words of the title equally prominent and visible. You may add other material on the covers
in addition. Copying with changes limited to the covers, as long as they preserve the title of the
Document and satisfy these conditions, can be treated as verbatim copying in other respects.
If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit legibly, you should put the first
ones listed (as many as fit reasonably) on the actual cover, and continue the rest onto adjacent
pages.
If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document numbering more than 100, you
must either include a machine-readable Transparent copy along with each Opaque copy, or state in
or with each Opaque copy a computer-network location from which the general network-using
public has access to download using public-standard network protocols a complete Transparent
copy of the Document, free of added material. If you use the latter option, you must take reasonably
prudent steps, when you begin distribution of Opaque copies in quantity, to ensure that this
Transparent copy will remain thus accessible at the stated location until at least one year after the
last time you distribute an Opaque copy (directly or through your agents or retailers) of that edition
to the public.
It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of the Document well before
redistributing any large number of copies, to give them a chance to provide you with an updated
version of the Document.
4. MODIFICATIONS
You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document under the conditions of
80 | Chess
GNU Free Documentation License
sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you release the Modified Version under precisely this
License, with the Modified Version filling the role of the Document, thus licensing distribution and
modification of the Modified Version to whoever possesses a copy of it. In addition, you must do
these things in the Modified Version:
A. Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title distinct from that of the Document,
and from those of previous versions (which should, if there were any, be listed in the History
section of the Document). You may use the same title as a previous version if the original
publisher of that version gives permission.
B. List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or entities responsible for
authorship of the modifications in the Modified Version, together with at least five of the
principal authors of the Document (all of its principal authors, if it has fewer than five), unless
they release you from this requirement.
C. State on the Title page the name of the publisher of the Modified Version, as the publisher.
D. Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.
E. Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications adjacent to the other copyright
notices.
F. Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license notice giving the public
permission to use the Modified Version under the terms of this License, in the form shown in
the Addendum below.
G. Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant Sections and required Cover Texts
given in the Document's license notice.
H. Include an unaltered copy of this License.
I. Preserve the section Entitled "History", Preserve its Title, and add to it an item stating at
least the title, year, new authors, and publisher of the Modified Version as given on the Title
Page. If there is no section Entitled "History" in the Document, create one stating the title,
year, authors, and publisher of the Document as given on its Title Page, then add an item
describing the Modified Version as stated in the previous sentence.
J. Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document for public access to a
Transparent copy of the Document, and likewise the network locations given in the Document
for previous versions it was based on. These may be placed in the "History" section. You may
omit a network location for a work that was published at least four years before the Document
itself, or if the original publisher of the version it refers to gives permission.
K. For any section Entitled "Acknowledgements" or "Dedications", Preserve the Title of the
section, and preserve in the section all the substance and tone of each of the contributor
acknowledgements and/or dedications given therein.
L. Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document, unaltered in their text and in their
titles. Section numbers or the equivalent are not considered part of the section titles.
M. Delete any section Entitled "Endorsements". Such a section may not be included in the
Modified Version.
N. Do not retitle any existing section to be Entitled "Endorsements" or to conflict in title with
any Invariant Section.
O. Preserve any Warranty Disclaimers.
If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or appendices that qualify as
Secondary Sections and contain no material copied from the Document, you may at your option
designate some or all of these sections as invariant. To do this, add their titles to the list of Invariant
Sections in the Modified Version's license notice. These titles must be distinct from any other
Wikibooks | 81
Chapter 9
section titles.
You may add a section Entitled "Endorsements", provided it contains nothing but endorsements
of your Modified Version by various parties--for example, statements of peer review or that the text
has been approved by an organization as the authoritative definition of a standard.
You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text, and a passage of up to 25
words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of the list of Cover Texts in the Modified Version. Only
one passage of Front-Cover Text and one of Back-Cover Text may be added by (or through
arrangements made by) any one entity. If the Document already includes a cover text for the same
cover, previously added by you or by arrangement made by the same entity you are acting on behalf
of, you may not add another; but you may replace the old one, on explicit permission from the
previous publisher that added the old one.
The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this License give permission to use
their names for publicity for or to assert or imply endorsement of any Modified Version.
5. COMBINING DOCUMENTS
You may combine the Document with other documents released under this License, under the
terms defined in section 4 above for modified versions, provided that you include in the
combination all of the Invariant Sections of all of the original documents, unmodified, and list them
all as Invariant Sections of your combined work in its license notice, and that you preserve all their
Warranty Disclaimers.
The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and multiple identical
Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single copy. If there are multiple Invariant Sections with
the same name but different contents, make the title of each such section unique by adding at the
end of it, in parentheses, the name of the original author or publisher of that section if known, or
else a unique number. Make the same adjustment to the section titles in the list of Invariant Sections
in the license notice of the combined work.
In the combination, you must combine any sections Entitled "History" in the various original
documents, forming one section Entitled "History"; likewise combine any sections Entitled
"Acknowledgements", and any sections Entitled "Dedications". You must delete all sections
Entitled "Endorsements."
6. COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS
You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other documents released under
this License, and replace the individual copies of this License in the various documents with a
single copy that is included in the collection, provided that you follow the rules of this License for
verbatim copying of each of the documents in all other respects.
You may extract a single document from such a collection, and distribute it individually under
82 | Chess
GNU Free Documentation License
this License, provided you insert a copy of this License into the extracted document, and follow this
License in all other respects regarding verbatim copying of that document.
7. AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS
A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other separate and independent
documents or works, in or on a volume of a storage or distribution medium, is called an "aggregate"
if the copyright resulting from the compilation is not used to limit the legal rights of the
compilation's users beyond what the individual works permit. When the Document is included in an
aggregate, this License does not apply to the other works in the aggregate which are not themselves
derivative works of the Document.
If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these copies of the Document, then
if the Document is less than one half of the entire aggregate, the Document's Cover Texts may be
placed on covers that bracket the Document within the aggregate, or the electronic equivalent of
covers if the Document is in electronic form. Otherwise they must appear on printed covers that
bracket the whole aggregate.
8. TRANSLATION
Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may distribute translations of the
Document under the terms of section 4. Replacing Invariant Sections with translations requires
special permission from their copyright holders, but you may include translations of some or all
Invariant Sections in addition to the original versions of these Invariant Sections. You may include
a translation of this License, and all the license notices in the Document, and any Warranty
Disclaimers, provided that you also include the original English version of this License and the
original versions of those notices and disclaimers. In case of a disagreement between the translation
and the original version of this License or a notice or disclaimer, the original version will prevail.
If a section in the Document is Entitled "Acknowledgements", "Dedications", or "History", the
requirement (section 4) to Preserve its Title (section 1) will typically require changing the actual
title.
9. TERMINATION
You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document except as expressly
provided for under this License. Any other attempt to copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the
Document is void, and will automatically terminate your rights under this License. However, parties
who have received copies, or rights, from you under this License will not have their licenses
terminated so long as such parties remain in full compliance.
Wikibooks | 83
Chapter 9
10. FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE
The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions of the GNU Free
Documentation License from time to time. Such new versions will be similar in spirit to the present
version, but may differ in detail to address new problems or concerns. See
http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/.
Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version number. If the Document
specifies that a particular numbered version of this License "or any later version" applies to it, you
have the option of following the terms and conditions either of that specified version or of any later
version that has been published (not as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation. If the Document
does not specify a version number of this License, you may choose any version ever published (not
as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation.
External links
• GNU Free Documentation License (Wikipedia article on the license)
• Official GNU FDL webpage
84 | Chess