Chinese (Mandarin)
From Wikibooks, the open-content textbooks collection
Version 0.2 March 17, 2006
Note: current version of this book can be found at
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Chinese_(Mandarin) 
Table of contents
Introduction / 介绍
About Chinese
中文是什么？
How to use this textbook
如何使用这本教科书
How to study Chinese
如何学习中文
Pronunciation
Pinyin Pronunciation Basics
Pronunciation of Initials
Pronunciation of Finals
Possible Initial-Final Combinations
Using Tones
Lessons / 课程
Lesson 1: Hello!
第一课：你好！
Lesson 2: Are you busy today?
第二课：今天你忙不忙?
Lesson 3: An introduction to particles
第三课：助词
Lesson 4: Word order and Verbs
第四课：词序和动词
Lesson 5: Measure words
第五课：量词
Lesson 6: More on interrogatives
第六课：疑问助词
Lesson 7: What's this?
第七课：这是什么?
Introduction / 介绍
About Chinese
The Chinese language (汉语/漢
語, 华语/華語 or 中文) is a
member of the Sino-Tibetan
family of languages. Chinese is a
tonal language, meaning that
pitch is used to distinguish
words. About one-fifth of the
world speaks some form of
Chinese as its native language,
making it the most common language in the world. The Chinese language (spoken in its
Standard Mandarin form) is the official language of the People's Republic of China and
the Republic of China (Taiwan), one of four official languages of Singapore, and one of
six official languages of the United Nations. It is also the form of Chinese that will be
taught in this wikibook.
Chinese is considered by many to be a language that is difficult to learn, mainly because
its grammar operates along very different principles compared to European languages
(for example, you will see no tenses, plurals, or subject-verb agreement, but you will see
counter words, reduplication rules, and verb completion/direction suffixes). In addition,
Chinese is one of the few languages in the world that does not use an alphabet or a
syllabary; instead, thousands of characters are used, each representing a word or a part of
a word. The government of China has developed a system of writing Chinese in the
Roman alphabet, known as Hanyu Pinyin (汉语拼音/漢語拼音, "spelling according to
sounds"). Hanyu Pinyin is used to write out Chinese names in English (for example,
"Beijing", "Shanghai", etc.) and helps learners of Chinese with their pronunciation. This
wikibook will teach you Hanyu Pinyin first, before any actual sentences. All examples
and new vocabulary will always be given together with Hanyu Pinyin.
There are two character sets: Simplified Chinese characters (简体字) and Traditional
Chinese (正體字 or 繁體字). Traditional Chinese was the writing used in much of
Chinese history, and continues to be used in Hong Kong, Macau, Republic of
China(Taiwan) and among overseas Chinese; Simplified Chinese was the result of
reforms carried out in Mainland China and is now used in Mainland China and Singapore.
There are some large differences between these two character systems, so most native
Chinese speakers are able to write in only one of the two systems, though they can
usually read both. However, it's much easier for people who learn Traditional Chinese to
read both sets than people who learn simplified Chinese only, as simplified Chinese
doesn't make sense in some contexts. This wikibook will introduce both sets of writing.
It's recommended that you learn to write one of them, and read both.
中华人民共和国 (中
国)
中華民國 (臺灣)
新加坡共和国 (新加
坡)
People's Republic of
China
(China)
Republic of China
(R.O.C)
Republic of
Singapore
(Singapore)
Chinese characters were also been used in the past by many Asian countries, and still
being used by some of them till today. Ancient Koreans knew how to read and write in
Chinese and they also regarded Chinese their official language in the past, until they have
made Korean characters their own language. However, until now they can still write their
names in Chinese. The Japanese still preserve many Chinese characters (they call it Kanji,
which means 漢字) today. They also write their names in Kanji. However, some Chinese
characters are developed by themselves which are different from the original Chinese
characters.
This textbook will assume that you have no prior knowledge of Chinese, but are willing
to take Chinese as a serious subject of study. Each lesson contains a combination of new
vocabulary and new grammar in a gradual fashion, building on previous lessons. Each
lesson's material should be appropriate for a week's worth of daily classes.
Each lesson consists of five parts:
1. Dialogue. Here you will see a dialogue carried out by two or more people. All
texts are given in 4 versions: Simplified Chinese, Traditional Chinese, Hanyu
Pinyin, and an English translation.
2. Grammar. This section breaks down all of the new sentence structures
introduced in the dialogue and shows example sentences to reinforce them.
3. Vocabulary. New vocabulary for the lesson, with translation and pronunciation.
Every newly introduced character will be linked to an image or animation
showing its stroke order.
4. Examples. A page of sentences and phrases giving more examples based on the
lesson material.
5. Exercises. Questions and activities to test comprehension of the material. May be
used as homework or as review material for lesson exams.
Speaking and Pronunciation
• Pay attention to the tones. Since there are so few syllables in Chinese, there are
many homonyms, making attention to tones very important. Learning to write the
pinyin with correct tones at the same time as the characters will improve your
pronunciation and your listening comprehension.
• Read the text aloud. Speaking (and hearing yourself speaking) will help
reinforce the text in your memory. Exaggerating the tones can help you remember
them. 
A radical
highlighted in
3 characters
Reading and Writing
• Practice writing. A lot. When you learn, write each character at least ten times
every week until you can remember it. Quiz yourself periodically to test your
memory and to find which characters you need more practice on. As you write,
think of the sound and meaning of the character, or say it out loud. Check out the
East Asian Orthography wikibook for more help with Chinese writing. Learn the
right stroke order initially and write carefully, looking at the printed character
each time before copying.
• Look for radicals. Radicals are components of Chinese characters that
you will see repeated over and over again. Learning the meaning of
radicals will help you to see the connections between similar categories
of words. Many characters are comprised of radical-phonetic pairings,
where the radical is the "root" that hints at the meaning of the word,
while another part of the character hints at the sound of the word.
Learning to spot radicals is also useful as they are used when looking up
unfamiliar words in Chinese dictionaries.
• Buy a dictionary. Useful for looking up new words or just browsing.
Get a beginner's dictionary so that you can have a larger font, usage
examples and Pinyin pronunciation, all of which are sometimes missing
in comprehensive dictionaries. Get a second dictionary later on if you
can't find every word you need. A good choice that provides many example
sentences and phrases would be The Starter Oxford Chinese Dictionary (sorry,
Simplified version only).
Suggested Reading Materials
• Children's story books (the characters are easier, many include pinyin or
zhuyin for difficult or even all characters)
• Take a look at various condensed dictionaries to get a feel for the
characters 
Pronunciation
This lesson shows the pronunciation of pinyin, the standard Romanization system used
for Mandarin Chinese and the one that will be used throughout the textbook. While most
of the letters are the same or very close to the English usage, there are some important
differences.
Pronunciation Basics
Mandarin Chinese may sound strange, but is actually relatively easy for English-speakers
to pick up—much easier than it is for Mandarin-speakers to learn English. A large part of
the reason is that Chinese has a very limited syllabary, meaning there are not many
sounds in the language, and hardly any new ones if you already know English. On the
other hand, that means Chinese-speakers trying to grasp English must learn to create
dozens of entirely new sounds—remember that as you proceed through these first lessons
on pronunciation!
One very different aspect of Chinese is its use of tones. Because of its limited syllabary,
pitches of voice are used to help differentiate words. While some dialects of Chinese
have up to nine tones, Mandarin is comparatively easy with only four. It's often difficult
for beginners to distinguish the tone of a word, especially when not sure of the context.
Even if you have perfect pitch, it may be hard to follow or reproduce what can seem like
a rollercoaster ride of tonal transitions. Don't worry though, as you'll improve with
practice. These lessons will describe how to understand and reproduce all the syllables
and tones of Chinese.
A note about IPA
The IPA, or International Phonetic Alphabet, is a standard set of symbols that can be used
to write any sound from any human language. If you know the IPA, it will be used here to
give you a grounding in pinyin—the most common Romanization system for Chinese,
which will be used for the rest of the text.
The Mandarin syllable
There are three parts to all syllables in Mandarin; the initial, the final, and the tone. In
pinyin, the tone, initial, and final are represented as follows:
Tone
The tone is represented by a tone mark placed on top of the syllable. There are exactly
four tone marks: ¯, ˊ, ˇ, and ˋ. The two dots on ü (like a German umlaut) do not have to
do with the tone, so if you see ǖ, ǘ, ǚ, or ǜ, the symbol above the dots represents the tone. 
Initial
The initial is:
• at the front of the syllable
• a consonant (not including y, or w)
• usually one letter, except for:zh, ch, sh
Final
The final is made up of the letter(s) after a syllable's initial, not including the tone mark.
A final:
• begins with a vowel
• can be made of 1-4 characters
• end with a vowel, n, ng, or r
Exceptions to initial-final combinations in syllables
Some syllables have no initial or no final. In Pinyin, this is shown as follows:
• For syllables with no final:
o an unpronounced i is added to the the end of the syllable
o Occurs only with the following initials:zh, ch, sh, r, z, c, s
• For syllables with no initial:
o if the final begins with an i, it is replaced with a y
o if the final begins with an u, it is replaced with a w
o if the final begins with an ü, it is replaced with yu
o Exceptions to the above:
 i alone is replaced by yi
 iu is replaced by you
 in is replaced by yin
 ing is replaced by ying
 u alone is replaced by wu
 ui is replaced by wei
 un is replaced by wen
 ueng is replaced by weng
One other exception:
• when combined with initials j, q, any ü in a final is changed to u
Please note that the pronunciation of these syllables are not according to the English
pronunciation of the letters. The next few pages give examples of how initials and finals
are pronounced, put together, and how to use tones.
Pronunciation of initials
Pinyin IPA Explanation
b [p] unaspirated p, as in spit
p [pȹ] as in English
m [m] as in English
f [f] as in English
d [t] unaspirated t, as in stand
t [tȹ] as in English
n [n] as in English
l [l] as in English
g [k] unaspirated k, as in skill
k [kȹ] as in English
h [x]
like the English h if followed by "a"; otherwise it is pronounced more roughly
(not unlike the Scots ch)
j [tǥ]
like q, but unaspirated. (To get this sound, first take the sound halfway between
joke and check, and then slowly pass it backwards along the tongue until it is
entirely clear of the tongue tip.) While this exact sound is not used in English,
the closest match is the j in ajar, not the s in Asia; this means that "Beijing" is
pronounced like "bay-jing", not like "beige-ing".
q [tǥȹ] like church; pass it backwards along the tongue until it is free of the tongue tip
x [ǥ]
like sh, but take the sound and pass it backwards along the tongue until it is
clear of the tongue tip; very similar to the final sound in German ich,
Portuguese enxada, luxo, xícara, puxa, and to huge or Hugh in some English
dialects
zh [tȒ]
ch with no aspiration (take the sound halfway between joke and church and
curl it upwards); very similar to merger in American English, but not voiced
ch [tȒȹ] as in chin, but with the tongue curled upwards; very similar to nurture in
American English, but strongly aspirated
sh [Ȓ]
as in shinbone, but with the tongue curled upwards; very similar to undershirt
in American English
r
[Ƞ]
or [ȋ]
similar to the English r in rank, but with the lips spread and with the tongue
curled upwards
z [ts]
unaspirated c (halfway between beds and bets), (more common example is
suds)
c [tsȹ] like ts, aspirated (more common example is cats)
s [s] as in sun 
Pronunciation of finals
Pinyin IPA
Finalonly
form
Explanation
a [ǡ] a if ending a syllable, then as in "father"
o [uǤ] o as in "so" (but shorter than ou)
e
[Ǵ],
[ǩ]
e
when occurring at the end of a syllable and not in the combinations of
ie, üe, ue, then a backward, unrounded vowel, which can be formed
by first pronouncing a plain continental "o" (AuE and NZE law) and
then spreading the lips without changing the position of the tongue.
That same sound is also similar to English "duh", but not as open.
Many unstressed syllables in Chinese use the schwa (idea), and this is
also written as e.
ê [ǫ] (n/a) as in "bet". Only used in certain interjections.
ai [aǺ] ai like English "eye", but a bit lighter
ei [ei] ei as in "hey"
ao [ǡȚ] ao approximately as in "cow"; the a is much more audible than the o
ou [ouʢ] ou as in "so"
an [an] an
starts with plain continental "a" (AuE and NZE bud) and ends with
"n"
en [ǩn] en as in "taken"
ang [ǡŋ] ang
as in German Angst, including the English loan word angst (starts
with the vowel sound in father and ends in the velar nasal; like song
in American English)
eng [Ǵŋ] eng like e above but with ng added to it at the back
er [aȋ]] er
like ar (exists only on own, or as last part of final in combination with
others- see bottom of list)
i [i] yi
like English "ee", except when preceded by "c", "ch", "r", "s", "sh",
"z" or "zh"; in these cases it should be pronounced as a natural
extension of those sounds in the same position, but slightly more open
to allow for a clear-sounding vowel to pass through
ia [iǡ] ya as i + a; like English "yard"
io [iouʢ] yo
as i + o; like English slang "yo"; (you will only see this as in finalonly form "yo"
ie [iǫ] ye
as i + ê; but is very short; e (pronounced like ê) is pronounced longer
and carries the main stress (similar to the initial sound ye in yet)
iai [iǡ] yai as i + ai; like "yi" in "yikes"; (you will only see this as in final-only
form "yai"
iao [iǡȚ] yao as i + ao
iu [iouʢ] yuo as i + ou
ian [iǫn] yian as i + an; like English yen
in [ʢiǩn] yin as i + en
iang [iǡŋ] yang as i + ang
ing [iǴŋ] ying as i + eng
u [u] wu like English "oo"
ua [ua] wa as u + a
uo [uǤ] wo as u + o; the o is pronounced shorter and lighter than in the o final
uai [uaǺ] wai as u + ai
ui [ueǺ] wei as u + ei; here, the i is pronounced like ei
uan [uan] wan as u + an
un [uǩn] wen as u + en; like the on in the English won
uang [uǡŋ] wang as u + ang; like the ang in English angst or anger
ong [uǴŋ] weng
as u + eng; starts with the vowel sound in book and ends with the
velar nasal sound in sing
ü [y] yu
as in German "üben" or French "lune" (To get this sound, say "ee"
with rounded lips)
üe [yǫ] yue as ü + ê; the ü is short and light
üan [yan] yuan as ü + an;
ün [yǩn] yun as ü + en;
iong [yǴŋ] yong as ü + eng; 
Using Tones
[Image: Relative pitch changes of the four tones]
Every syllable in Chinese has a clearly defined pitch of voice associated
with it to distinguish words with the same sound from each other.
Unfortunately, there is no indication of the tone given when reading a
character, so the tones for words must be individually memorized. To
help with this, pinyin uses four easily-remembered diacritical marks to
tell you what the tones of words are. The diagram to the right shows the
pitch changes of the four tones on a five-bar scale going from lowest (1),
to highest (5), while the four tone marks are:
1. First tone ( ¯ ), high level.
2. Second tone (ˊ), middle rising.
3. Third tone ( ˇ ), low dipping.
4. Fourth tone (ˋ), high falling.
There is also a neutral, so-called "fifth tone", which is unstressed and usually goes
unmarked.
Tones marks are always placed over vowels, never consonants. If there is more than one
vowel in the syllable, the mark first goes over the a, e, i, o and u respectively
(alphabetical order). The only exception to this rule is when a syllable with "iu" needs a
tone mark, in which case the mark is placed over the "u", not the "i".
Tone changes
[Image: The shape of the 3rd tone when before 1st, 2nd and 4th
tones]
The third tone, with its dip-and-rebound, is hard to fit into a
continuous sentence. This is why the third-tone changes
depending on its environment. There are two rules:
1. If a third tone comes before another third tone, then it is
pronounced as a second tone.
2. If a third tone comes before any other tone, then it only
dips, and doesn't rebound and is called a half-third tone
(see image).
Because of these broad rules, the majority of third tones you 
encounter will be second tones or half-third tones. Be mindful of this because the tone
marks remain unchanged despite differences in actual pronunciation from the written
tone marks.
Syllables with no tone
Some syllables don't have a tone. Those syllables are not stressed, and they take their
tone from the syllable before them:
1. If it follows a first- or second-tone syllable, then the toneless syllable is mid-range.
(Say ah... in a relaxed tone, as if you've been sedated.)
2. If it follows a third-tone syllable, then the toneless syllable is high, as if the dipand-rebound of the third-tone continues right into it. (Say w-e-ll with a break in
the middle: weh—ell. That's a third-tone syllable plus a toneless syllable.)
3. If it follows a fourth-tone syllable, then the toneless syllable is low, as if the fall
of the fourth-tone continues right into it. (Say Stop!!! with a break in the middle:
Sto-op!. That's a fourth-tone syllable plus a toneless syllable.) 
Lesson 1: 你好！
It is appropriate to start off the introduction to Chinese with the common greeting: 你
好。 Below is a dialogue between two people meeting each other for the first time.
Dialogue 1
 Simplified Characters Traditional Characters
金妮: 你好。 金妮: 你好。
欧文: 妮好。 歐文: 妳好。
金妮: 我叫金妮。你叫什么名字？ 金妮: 我叫金妮。你叫什麽名字？
欧文: 我叫欧文。 歐文: 我叫歐文。
Pīnyīn English
Jīnní: Nǐ hǎo. Ginny: Hello.
Ōuwén: Nǐ hǎo. Owen: Hello.
Jīnní: Wǒ jiào Jīnní. Nǐ jiào shénme
míngzi?
Ginny: I'm Ginny. What's your
name?
Ōuwén: Wǒ jiào Ōuwén. Owen: I'm Owen.
Dialogue 2
Simplified Characters Traditional Characters
金
妮:
他们是谁？
金
妮:
他們是誰？
欧
文:
她是艾美，她是中国人。他是东
尼，是美国人。
歐
文:
她是艾美，她是中國人。他是東
尼，是美國人。
金
妮:
你也是美国人吗？
金
妮:
你也是美國人嗎？
欧
文:
不是，我是英国人。你呢？你是
哪国人？
歐
文:
不是，我是英國人。妳呢？妳是
哪國人？
金
妮:
我是法国人。
金
妮:
我是法國人。
Pīnyīn English
Jīnní: Tāmen shì shéi? Ginny: Who are they?
Ōuwén: Tā shì Àiměi, tā shì Zhōngguórén. Owen: She is Amy. She's Chinese. He's 
Tā shì Dōngní, shì Měiguórén. Tony, an American.
Jīnní: Nĭ yě shì Měiguórén ma? Ginny: Are you also American?
Ōuwén: Bú shì. Wǒ shì Yīngguórén. Nǐ ne?
Nǐ shì nǎ guó rén?
Owen: No, I'm British. How about you?
Which nationality are you?
Jīnní: Wǒ shì Fǎguórén. Ginny: I'm French.
Vocabulary
Simplified
(traditional in
parentheses)
Pīnyīn
Part of
speech English [m.]
1. 你 (m.=你, f.=妳) nǐ (pro) you (singular)
2. 好 hǎo (adj) good
3. 们 (們) men (n suffix) (pluralizing suffix for pronouns)
4. 你们 (f.=妳们) nǐmen (pro) you (plural)
5. 我 wǒ (pro) I, me
6. 我们 wǒmen (pro) we, us
7. 他 tā (pro) he, him
8. 她 tā (pro) she, her
9. 他们 (f.=她们) tāmen (pro) they, them
10. 叫 jiào (v) to be named
11. 什么 (什麽) shénme (pro) what
12. 名字 míngzi (n) name
13. 是 shì (v) to be (am/is/are)
14. 谁 (誰) shéi; shuí (pro) who, whom
15. 国 (國) guó (n) country
16. 人 rén (n) person [个 (個) gè]
17. 也 yě (adv) also
18. 吗 (嗎) ma (part) (question particle)
19. 呢 ne (part) (question particle for known context)
20. 哪 nǎ; něi (pro) what, which
21. 不 bù (adv) (negates verbs)] 
Proper Nouns
Simplified
(traditional in
parentheses)
Pīnyīn English
1. 金妮 Jīnní Ginny
2. 欧文 (歐文) Ōuwén Owen
3. 艾美 Àiměi Amy
4. 东尼 (東尼) Dōngní Tony
5. 中国 (中國) Zhōngguó China
6. 美国 (美國) Měiguó America
7. 英国 (英國) Yīngguó Britain
8. 法国 (法國) Făguó; Fàguó (in Taiwan) France
Grammar
Basic Sentences
The sentence structure of Chinese is very similar to that of English in that they both
follow the pattern of Subject-Verb-Object (SVO). Unlike many languages, verbs in
Chinese aren't conjugated and noun and adjective endings don't change. They are never
affected by things such as time or person.
1. 我叫艾美。
Wǒ jiào Àiměi.
I'm called Amy.
Note that in Chinese you do not need the auxiliary verb to be to use other verbs as
in English. While the sentence is translated as "I am called Amy", saying "我是叫
艾美" would be considered awkward.
Sentences using shì [是]
S + V + O
Shì, the equational verb to be, can be used as the English is or equals. Shì can only be
used to equate combinations of nouns, noun phrases, and pronouns. In Chinese, shì, the
"to be" verb, is not used with adjectives, as it is in English, as in, "He is cold."
1. 我是中国人。
Wǒ shì Zhōngguórén.
I am a Chinese person.
2. 她是金妮。
Tā shì Jīnní.
She is Ginny.
3. 她们是英国人。
Tāmen shì Yīngguórén.
They are English.
Shì is negated when preceded by bù [不]. Bù is normally 4th tone, but changes to a 2nd
tone when it precedes another 4th tone.
1. 他不是东尼。
Tā bú shì Dōngní.
He is not Tony.
2. 我不是美国人。
Wǒ bú shì Měiguórén.
I am not American.
S + 是 + O
S + 不 + 是 + O
The question particle ma [吗]
Adding the modal particle ma [吗] to the end of a sentence makes a statement into a
question. There is no change in word order as in English.
The declarative example sentence in #1 is transformed into an interrogative in #2.
1. 她是金妮。
Tā shì Jīnní.
She is Ginny.
2. 她是金妮吗？
Tā shì Jīnní ma?
Is she Ginny?
The question particle ne [呢]
Using the ending modal particle ne [呢] makes a question when the context is already
known, similar to saying "How about...?" in English. A common circumstance is when
you wish to repeat a question that was just asked for another subject. Simply add ne to the
end of the noun or pronoun to ask "How about this".
1. 我叫东尼, 你呢？
Wǒ jiào Dōngní, nǐ ne?
I'm called Tony. How about you?
2. 艾美是中国人, 他呢？
Àiměi shì Zhōngguórén, tā ne?
Amy is Chinese. How about him?
Question words
Like particles, question words make statements into questions without changing the order
of the sentence. To make one, simply substitute the QW in for the place the subject would
be in the answer. 
1. 他们是哪国人？
Tāmen shì nǎ guó rén?
What country are they from?
2. 谁是美国人？
Shéi shì Měiguórén?
Who is American?
3. 她是谁？
Tā shì shéi?
Who is she?
Lesson 2: 今天你忙不忙？
Lesson 2 contains a dialogue of two students discussing their classes for the day.
Dialogues 1 & 2: Characters
 Simplified Characters Traditional Characters
东
尼:
艾美，早安。
東
尼:
艾美，早安。
艾
美:
早。你好吗？
艾
美:
早。你好嗎？
东
尼:
我很好，谢谢。你呢？
東
尼:
我很好，謝謝。妳呢？
艾
美:
我也很好。今天你忙不忙？
艾
美:
我也很好。今天你忙不忙？
东
尼:
今天我很忙。我有五节课。
東
尼:
今天我很忙。我有五節課。
艾
美:
五节？！太多了！今天我只有一
节。
艾
美:
五節？！太多了！今天我只有一
節。
东
尼:
一节？！太少了！
東
尼:
一節？! 太少了！
Dialogues 1 & 2: Pīnyīn/English
Pīnyīn English
Dōngní: Àiměi, zăoān. Tony: Good morning, Amy.
Àiměi: Zăo. Nǐ hǎo ma? Amy: Good morning. How are you?
Dōngní: Wǒ hěn hǎo, xièxie. Nǐ ne? Tony: I'm fine, thanks. How about you?
Àiměi: Wǒ yě hěn hǎo. Jīntiān nǐ máng
bù máng? Amy: I'm also fine. Are you busy today?
Dōngní: Jīntiān wǒ hěn máng. Wǒ yǒu wǔ
jié kè. Tony: I'm very busy today. I have five
classes.
Àiměi: Wǔ jié?! Tài duō le! Jīntiān wǒ
zhĭ yǒu yì jié. Amy: Five?! That's too many! Today I
only have one.
Dōngní: Yì jié?! Tài shăo le! Tony: One?! That's too few! 
Vocabulary
Simplified
(traditional in
parentheses)
Pīnyīn
Part of
speech English [m.]
1. 一 yī (num) one
2. 二 èr (num) two
3. 三 sān (num) three
4. 四 sì (num) four
5. 五 wǔ (num) five
6. 六 liù (num) six
7. 七 qī (num) seven
8. 八 bā (num) eight
9. 九 jiǔ (num) nine
10. 十 shí (num) ten
11. 早 zăo (n) morning; good morning
12. 安 ān (adj) peaceful
13. 早安 zăoān (phrase) good morning
14. 很 hěn (adv) very
15. 谢谢 (謝謝) xièxie (v) thanks
16. 天 tiān (n) day/sky
17. 今天 jīntiān (n) today
18. 忙 máng (adj) busy
19. 有 yǒu (v) to have, possess
20. 没 méi (adv) negates yǒu
21. 节 (節) jié (m) (measure word for sections of things)
22. 课 (課) kè (n) class [节]
23. 太 tài (adv) too, extremely
24. 了 le (part) (combines with 太 - see grammar)
25. 多 duō (adj) many 
26. 少 shăo (adj) few
27. 只 zhĭ (adv) only, merely
Grammar
Le [了] as emphasizer
The particle le [了] as used here serves to add emphasis to the verb or adjective of the
sentence. It is often seen paired with tài [太] to express excessiveness.
Affirmative-negative questions
A sentence can be made into a question by having both affirmative and negative options
together. To answer in the affirmative, the verb or adjective is repeated. (An affirmative
adjective in this case is usually preceded by hěn [很] to avoid a comparitive tone.)
Responding in the negative is simply saying "not verb" or "not adjective".
Example:
Q: 他是不是东尼?
Tā shì bu shì Dōngní?
Is he Tony?
A: 是。or 不是。
Shì. or Bú shì.
Yes (he is). or No (he isn't).
Example:
Q:今天艾美忙不忙?
Jīntiān Àiměi máng bù máng?
Is Amy busy today?
S + V 不 V + O?
Because the bù in affirmativenegative questions is often said
quickly, marking the tone on bù is
not strictly necessary in their case.
S + adj. 不 adj.?
A: 她很忙。or 她不忙。
Tā hěn máng. or Tā bù máng.
Yes, she's busy. or No, she's not busy.
Sentences using yǒu [有]
Yǒu [有] means to have and indicates possession.
Example:
我有三节课。
Wǒ yǒu sān jié kè.
I have three classes.
Yǒu is negated when preceded by méi [没].
Example:
今天她们没有一节课。
Jīntiān tāmen méi yǒu yì jié kè.
They don't have any class today.
S + 有 + O
S + 没 + 有 + O
Lesson 3: An introduction to particles
The Chinese language employs heavy usage of particles to modify the meaning of
characters and sentences. Since Chinese has neither inflections nor tense, the mastery of
particles is an absolute must if one is to fully comprehend both written and spoken
Chinese. Below, you will find some of the most common particles in everyday Chinese.
The De [的] particle as possessive
The particle de [的] can be used to indicate possession. It is roughly equivalent to the
contraction "X's" in English, where X is the subject.
1. 她的名字是金妮。
Tā de míngzi shì Jīnní.
Her name is Ginny.
The Le/Liăo particle
Perfect Particle, Completive Particle The 了 particle is used mainly to indicate a
completed action (in English, this is the perfect aspect).
Example: 他 走 了。 Tā zŏu le. He has gone.
The "le" here is used to modify 走 (zŏu, to go) into an action which has already been
completed.
了 can also be used as an imperative, that is, a command which is issued by the subject
Example: 别 再 打扰 我 了! Bié zài dărăo wŏ le! Do not bother me again!
In this instance, le is used in conjunction with bié ("do not") to form an imperative. Note:
most imperatives are not formed using this construction.
Finally, 了, as in Liăo (a homographic variant) can be used to indicate the subject's
capability in doing such and such.
Example: 我 实在 吃 不 了 了。 Wŏ shízài chī bù liăo le. I cannot possibly eat any more.
At first glance, this sentence may seem a bit daunting as it includes two instances of the
le particle, paired side-by-side. However, the first le is understood to be liăo given its
placement (bù + le is a nonsensical pairing). Therefore, liăo serves to indicate the
capability of eating any further and le emphasizes this assertion. 
The Zhe/Zháo particle
The Zhe/Zháo particle is another particle that you'll frequently encounter in the course of
your Chinese studies. Zhe, when added beside a character and thus forming a preposition,
is used primarily to indicate an action which is continuous.
Example: 他 睡着觉 时 有人 敲门。 Tā shuìzhe jiào shí yŏurén qiāomén. While he was
sleeping, someone knocked on the door.
In addition, Zháo is used to indicate accomplishment.
Example: 我 终於 把 东西 买 着 了! Wŏ zhōngyú bă dōngxī măi zháo le. I've finally
been able to buy this item!
The bă (noun) (verb) zháo (le) construction is a particularly useful one and should be
studied. 
This Page Contains Content for Later Placement in
Lessons
Comparisons Using bǐ [比]
Comparisons can be made using bǐ [比]. Adverbs (like 不，也，只，都）and any
auxilary verbs are placed before bǐ in the sentence. The amount of the disparity between
the two is placed after the adjective.
1. 她比我忙。
Tā bǐ wǒ máng.
She is busier than I am.
2. 东尼也比我忙很多。
Dōngní yě bǐ wǒ máng hěn duō.
Tony is also a lot busier than I am.
Measure Words/量词（liang4ci2)
In Chinese, most specified or numbered nouns must be preceded by measure words
according to the type of object. It is like the English use of “pair” in the phrase “two pairs
of pants”. Like the word “pair,” Chinese measure words are placed between the noun and
the preceding number or demonstrative pronoun.
1. 这本书里没有一个汉字。
Zhè bĕn shū lǐ méi yŏu yí gè Hànzì.
This book doesn’t contain one Chinese character.
2. 那间宿舍有六十个学生。
Nà jiān sùshè yŏu liùshí ge xuésheng.
That dorm has sixty students.
A 比 B + Adj.
Some Common Measure Words
For most items, "个" gè is used as a general measure word. 一个书包 yí gè shū bāo. Use
"个" when you are unsure of the correct measure word to use.
For bigger animals like cows, we use "头". 一头牛 yì tóu niú. In this example, "一" is our
number, "牛" was the item we were counting, and "头" was our measure word. Literally
translated into English, "头" means head. So literally we are saying one head of cow.
However, for horses, we use "匹". 一匹马 yì pǐ mă. One horse.
For medium-sized domestic animals like dogs or chickens, the measure word is "只" zhī.
一只狗 yì zhī gŏu. One dog. For fish and snakes, however, we use "条" tiáo. 一条鱼 yì
tiáo yú. One fish.
For vehicles, the measure word is "辆" liàng. 一辆车 yí liàng chē. One car. For boats,
however, "艘" sōu is used. 一艘船 yì sōu chuán. One boat.
For clothes and furniture, the measure word is "件" jiàn. 一件衣服 yí jiàn yī fù. One
piece of clothing.
For flat things like paper or tables, we use "张" zhāng. 一张纸 yì zhāng zhĭ. One piece of
paper.
For flowers and clouds, we use "朵" duŏ. 一朵花 yì duŏ huā. One flower.
For things with handles like knives, scissors and umbrellas we use "把" bă. 一把刀 yì bă
dāo. One knife. The official measure word for scissors is "把", however, many Chinese
use "个" when speaking. In written Chinese however, people usually revert to "把".
A more complete reference list of Chinese measure words can be found in the Wikipedia. 
License
GNU Free Documentation License
Version 1.2, November 2002
Copyright (C) 2000,2001,2002 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
51 Franklin St, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA
Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.
0. PREAMBLE
The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other functional and useful
document "free" in the sense of freedom: to assure everyone the effective freedom to
copy and redistribute it, with or without modifying it, either commercially or
noncommercially. Secondarily, this License preserves for the author and publisher a way
to get credit for their work, while not being considered responsible for modifications
made by others.
This License is a kind of "copyleft", which means that derivative works of the document
must themselves be free in the same sense. It complements the GNU General Public
License, which is a copyleft license designed for free software.
We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for free software, because
free software needs free documentation: a free program should come with manuals
providing the same freedoms that the software does. But this License is not limited to
software manuals; it can be used for any textual work, regardless of subject matter or
whether it is published as a printed book. We recommend this License principally for
works whose purpose is instruction or reference.
[edit]
1. APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS
This License applies to any manual or other work, in any medium, that contains a notice
placed by the copyright holder saying it can be distributed under the terms of this License.
Such a notice grants a world-wide, royalty-free license, unlimited in duration, to use that
work under the conditions stated herein. The "Document", below, refers to any such
manual or work. Any member of the public is a licensee, and is addressed as "you". You
accept the license if you copy, modify or distribute the work in a way requiring
permission under copyright law. 
A "Modified Version" of the Document means any work containing the Document or a
portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with modifications and/or translated into another
language.
A "Secondary Section" is a named appendix or a front-matter section of the Document
that deals exclusively with the relationship of the publishers or authors of the Document
to the Document's overall subject (or to related matters) and contains nothing that could
fall directly within that overall subject. (Thus, if the Document is in part a textbook of
mathematics, a Secondary Section may not explain any mathematics.) The relationship
could be a matter of historical connection with the subject or with related matters, or of
legal, commercial, philosophical, ethical or political position regarding them.
The "Invariant Sections" are certain Secondary Sections whose titles are designated, as
being those of Invariant Sections, in the notice that says that the Document is released
under this License. If a section does not fit the above definition of Secondary then it is
not allowed to be designated as Invariant. The Document may contain zero Invariant
Sections. If the Document does not identify any Invariant Sections then there are none.
The "Cover Texts" are certain short passages of text that are listed, as Front-Cover Texts
or Back-Cover Texts, in the notice that says that the Document is released under this
License. A Front-Cover Text may be at most 5 words, and a Back-Cover Text may be at
most 25 words.
A "Transparent" copy of the Document means a machine-readable copy, represented in a
format whose specification is available to the general public, that is suitable for revising
the document straightforwardly with generic text editors or (for images composed of
pixels) generic paint programs or (for drawings) some widely available drawing editor,
and that is suitable for input to text formatters or for automatic translation to a variety of
formats suitable for input to text formatters. A copy made in an otherwise Transparent
file format whose markup, or absence of markup, has been arranged to thwart or
discourage subsequent modification by readers is not Transparent. An image format is
not Transparent if used for any substantial amount of text. A copy that is not
"Transparent" is called "Opaque".
Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain ASCII without markup,
Texinfo input format, LaTeX input format, SGML or XML using a publicly available
DTD, and standard-conforming simple HTML, PostScript or PDF designed for human
modification. Examples of transparent image formats include PNG, XCF and JPG.
Opaque formats include proprietary formats that can be read and edited only by
proprietary word processors, SGML or XML for which the DTD and/or processing tools
are not generally available, and the machine-generated HTML, PostScript or PDF
produced by some word processors for output purposes only.
The "Title Page" means, for a printed book, the title page itself, plus such following
pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the material this License requires to appear in the
title page. For works in formats which do not have any title page as such, "Title Page" 
means the text near the most prominent appearance of the work's title, preceding the
beginning of the body of the text.
A section "Entitled XYZ" means a named subunit of the Document whose title either is
precisely XYZ or contains XYZ in parentheses following text that translates XYZ in
another language. (Here XYZ stands for a specific section name mentioned below, such
as "Acknowledgements", "Dedications", "Endorsements", or "History".) To "Preserve the
Title" of such a section when you modify the Document means that it remains a section
"Entitled XYZ" according to this definition.
The Document may include Warranty Disclaimers next to the notice which states that this
License applies to the Document. These Warranty Disclaimers are considered to be
included by reference in this License, but only as regards disclaiming warranties: any
other implication that these Warranty Disclaimers may have is void and has no effect on
the meaning of this License.
[edit]
2. VERBATIM COPYING
You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either commercially or
noncommercially, provided that this License, the copyright notices, and the license notice
saying this License applies to the Document are reproduced in all copies, and that you
add no other conditions whatsoever to those of this License. You may not use technical
measures to obstruct or control the reading or further copying of the copies you make or
distribute. However, you may accept compensation in exchange for copies. If you
distribute a large enough number of copies you must also follow the conditions in section
3.
You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above, and you may publicly
display copies.
[edit]
3. COPYING IN QUANTITY
If you publish printed copies (or copies in media that commonly have printed covers) of
the Document, numbering more than 100, and the Document's license notice requires
Cover Texts, you must enclose the copies in covers that carry, clearly and legibly, all
these Cover Texts: Front-Cover Texts on the front cover, and Back-Cover Texts on the
back cover. Both covers must also clearly and legibly identify you as the publisher of
these copies. The front cover must present the full title with all words of the title equally
prominent and visible. You may add other material on the covers in addition. Copying
with changes limited to the covers, as long as they preserve the title of the Document and
satisfy these conditions, can be treated as verbatim copying in other respects. 
If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit legibly, you should put the
first ones listed (as many as fit reasonably) on the actual cover, and continue the rest onto
adjacent pages.
If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document numbering more than 100,
you must either include a machine-readable Transparent copy along with each Opaque
copy, or state in or with each Opaque copy a computer-network location from which the
general network-using public has access to download using public-standard network
protocols a complete Transparent copy of the Document, free of added material. If you
use the latter option, you must take reasonably prudent steps, when you begin distribution
of Opaque copies in quantity, to ensure that this Transparent copy will remain thus
accessible at the stated location until at least one year after the last time you distribute an
Opaque copy (directly or through your agents or retailers) of that edition to the public.
It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of the Document well before
redistributing any large number of copies, to give them a chance to provide you with an
updated version of the Document.
[edit]
4. MODIFICATIONS
You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document under the conditions
of sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you release the Modified Version under precisely
this License, with the Modified Version filling the role of the Document, thus licensing
distribution and modification of the Modified Version to whoever possesses a copy of it.
In addition, you must do these things in the Modified Version:
A. Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title distinct from that of the
Document, and from those of previous versions (which should, if there were any,
be listed in the History section of the Document). You may use the same title as a
previous version if the original publisher of that version gives permission.
B. List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or entities responsible
for authorship of the modifications in the Modified Version, together with at least
five of the principal authors of the Document (all of its principal authors, if it has
fewer than five), unless they release you from this requirement.
C. State on the Title page the name of the publisher of the Modified Version, as
the publisher.
D. Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.
E. Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications adjacent to the
other copyright notices.
F. Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license notice giving the
public permission to use the Modified Version under the terms of this License, in
the form shown in the Addendum below.
G. Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant Sections and required
Cover Texts given in the Document's license notice.
H. Include an unaltered copy of this License.
I. Preserve the section Entitled "History", Preserve its Title, and add to it an item
stating at least the title, year, new authors, and publisher of the Modified Version
as given on the Title Page. If there is no section Entitled "History" in the
Document, create one stating the title, year, authors, and publisher of the
Document as given on its Title Page, then add an item describing the Modified
Version as stated in the previous sentence.
J. Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document for public access
to a Transparent copy of the Document, and likewise the network locations given
in the Document for previous versions it was based on. These may be placed in
the "History" section. You may omit a network location for a work that was
published at least four years before the Document itself, or if the original
publisher of the version it refers to gives permission.
K. For any section Entitled "Acknowledgements" or "Dedications", Preserve the
Title of the section, and preserve in the section all the substance and tone of each
of the contributor acknowledgements and/or dedications given therein.
L. Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document, unaltered in their text and
in their titles. Section numbers or the equivalent are not considered part of the
section titles.
M. Delete any section Entitled "Endorsements". Such a section may not be
included in the Modified Version.
N. Do not retitle any existing section to be Entitled "Endorsements" or to conflict
in title with any Invariant Section.
O. Preserve any Warranty Disclaimers.
If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or appendices that qualify as
Secondary Sections and contain no material copied from the Document, you may at your
option designate some or all of these sections as invariant. To do this, add their titles to
the list of Invariant Sections in the Modified Version's license notice. These titles must be
distinct from any other section titles.
You may add a section Entitled "Endorsements", provided it contains nothing but
endorsements of your Modified Version by various parties--for example, statements of
peer review or that the text has been approved by an organization as the authoritative
definition of a standard.
You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text, and a passage of up to
25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of the list of Cover Texts in the Modified
Version. Only one passage of Front-Cover Text and one of Back-Cover Text may be
added by (or through arrangements made by) any one entity. If the Document already
includes a cover text for the same cover, previously added by you or by arrangement
made by the same entity you are acting on behalf of, you may not add another; but you
may replace the old one, on explicit permission from the previous publisher that added
the old one. 
The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this License give permission to
use their names for publicity for or to assert or imply endorsement of any Modified
Version.
[edit]
5. COMBINING DOCUMENTS
You may combine the Document with other documents released under this License,
under the terms defined in section 4 above for modified versions, provided that you
include in the combination all of the Invariant Sections of all of the original documents,
unmodified, and list them all as Invariant Sections of your combined work in its license
notice, and that you preserve all their Warranty Disclaimers.
The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and multiple identical
Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single copy. If there are multiple Invariant
Sections with the same name but different contents, make the title of each such section
unique by adding at the end of it, in parentheses, the name of the original author or
publisher of that section if known, or else a unique number. Make the same adjustment to
the section titles in the list of Invariant Sections in the license notice of the combined
work.
In the combination, you must combine any sections Entitled "History" in the various
original documents, forming one section Entitled "History"; likewise combine any
sections Entitled "Acknowledgements", and any sections Entitled "Dedications". You
must delete all sections Entitled "Endorsements."
[edit]
6. COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS
You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other documents released
under this License, and replace the individual copies of this License in the various
documents with a single copy that is included in the collection, provided that you follow
the rules of this License for verbatim copying of each of the documents in all other
respects.
You may extract a single document from such a collection, and distribute it individually
under this License, provided you insert a copy of this License into the extracted
document, and follow this License in all other respects regarding verbatim copying of
that document.
[edit]
7. AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS 
A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other separate and independent
documents or works, in or on a volume of a storage or distribution medium, is called an
"aggregate" if the copyright resulting from the compilation is not used to limit the legal
rights of the compilation's users beyond what the individual works permit. When the
Document is included in an aggregate, this License does not apply to the other works in
the aggregate which are not themselves derivative works of the Document.
If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these copies of the Document,
then if the Document is less than one half of the entire aggregate, the Document's Cover
Texts may be placed on covers that bracket the Document within the aggregate, or the
electronic equivalent of covers if the Document is in electronic form. Otherwise they
must appear on printed covers that bracket the whole aggregate.
[edit]
8. TRANSLATION
Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may distribute translations of the
Document under the terms of section 4. Replacing Invariant Sections with translations
requires special permission from their copyright holders, but you may include translations
of some or all Invariant Sections in addition to the original versions of these Invariant
Sections. You may include a translation of this License, and all the license notices in the
Document, and any Warranty Disclaimers, provided that you also include the original
English version of this License and the original versions of those notices and disclaimers.
In case of a disagreement between the translation and the original version of this License
or a notice or disclaimer, the original version will prevail.
If a section in the Document is Entitled "Acknowledgements", "Dedications", or
"History", the requirement (section 4) to Preserve its Title (section 1) will typically
require changing the actual title.
[edit]
9. TERMINATION
You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document except as expressly
provided for under this License. Any other attempt to copy, modify, sublicense or
distribute the Document is void, and will automatically terminate your rights under this
License. However, parties who have received copies, or rights, from you under this
License will not have their licenses terminated so long as such parties remain in full
compliance.
[edit]
10. FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE 
The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions of the GNU Free
Documentation License from time to time. Such new versions will be similar in spirit to
the present version, but may differ in detail to address new problems or concerns. See
http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/.
Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version number. If the Document
specifies that a particular numbered version of this License "or any later version" applies
to it, you have the option of following the terms and conditions either of that specified
version or of any later version that has been published (not as a draft) by the Free
Software Foundation. If the Document does not specify a version number of this License,
you may choose any version ever published (not as a draft) by the Free Software
Foundation. 